docs/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/tolk/tolk-vs-func/in-short.md, before:

import Feedback from '@site/src/components/Feedback';

# Tolk vs FunC: in short

Tolk is much more similar to TypeScript and Kotlin than C and Lisp. 
But it still gives you complete control over the TVM assembler since it has a FunC kernel inside.

1. Functions are declared via `fun`, get methods via `get`, variables via `var`, immutable variables via `val`, putting types on the right; parameter types are mandatory; return type can be omitted (auto inferred), as well as for locals; specifiers `inline` and others are `@` attributes
```tolk
global storedV: int;

fun parseData(cs: slice): cell {
    var flags: int = cs.loadMessageFlags();
    ...
}

@inline
fun sum(a: int, b: int) {   // auto inferred int
    val both = a + b;       // same
    return both;
}

get currentCounter(): int { ... }
```
2. No `impure`, it's by default, the Tolk compiler won't drop user function calls
3. Not `recv_internal` and `recv_external`, but `onInternalMessage` and `onExternalMessage`
4. `2+2` is 4, not an identifier; identifiers are alpha-numeric; use naming `const OP_INCREASE` instead of `const op::increase`; `cell` and `slice` are valid identifiers (not keywords)
5. Logical operators AND `&&`, OR `||`, NOT `!` are supported
6. Syntax improvements:
    - `;; comment` → `// comment`
    - `{- comment -}` → `/* comment */`
    - `#include` → `import`, with a strict rule "import what you use"
    - `~ found` → `!found` (for true/false only, obviously) (true is -1, like in FunC)
    - `v = null()` → `v = null`
    - `null?(v)` → `v == null`, same for `builder_null?` and others
    - `~ null?(v)` → `c != null`
    - `throw(excNo)` → `throw excNo`
    - `catch(_, _)` → `catch`
    - `catch(_, excNo)` → `catch(excNo)`
    - `throw_unless(excNo, cond)` → `assert(cond, excNo)`
    - `throw_if(excNo, cond)` → `assert(!cond, excNo)`
    - `return ()` → `return`
    - `do ... until (cond)` → `do ... while (!cond)`
    - `elseif` → `else if`
    - `ifnot (cond)` → `if (!cond)`
    - `"..."c` → `stringCrc32("...")` (and other postfixes also)
7. A function can be called even if declared below; forward declarations not needed; the compiler at first does parsing, and then it does symbol resolving; there is now an AST representation of source code
8. stdlib functions renamed to ~~verbose~~ clear names, camelCase style; it's now embedded, not downloaded from GitHub; it's split into several files; common functions available always, more specific available with `import "@stdlib/tvm-dicts"`, IDE will suggest you; here is [a mapping](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/tolk/tolk-vs-func/stdlib)
9. No `~` tilda methods; `cs.loadInt(32)` modifies a slice and returns an integer; `b.storeInt(x, 32)` modifies a builder; `b = b.storeInt()` also works since it is not only modifies but returns; chained methods work identically to JS, they return `self`; everything works exactly as expected, similar to JS; no runtime overhead, exactly same Fift instructions; custom methods are created with ease; tilda `~` does not exist in Tolk at all; [more details here](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/tolk/tolk-vs-func/mutability)
10. Clear and readable error messages on type mismatch
11. `bool` type support
12. Indexed access `tensorVar.0` and `tupleVar.0` support
13. Nullable types `T?`, null safety, smart casts, operator `!`
14. Union types and pattern matching (for types and for expressions, switch-like behavior)
15. Type aliases are supported
16. Trailing comma is supported
17. Semicolon after the last statement in a block is optional

#### Tooling around
- JetBrains plugin exists
- VS Code extension [exists](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/tolk-vscode)
- WASM wrapper for blueprint [exists](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/tolk-js)
- And even a converter from FunC to Tolk [exists](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/convert-func-to-tolk)

## See also

- [Tolk vs FunC: in detail](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/tolk/tolk-vs-func/in-detail)

<Feedback />

Commit message:

Update docs for Tolk v0.12 (#1153)
* Update docs for Tolk v0.12

docs/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/tolk/tolk-vs-func/in-short.md, after:

import Feedback from '@site/src/components/Feedback';

# Tolk vs FunC: in short

Tolk is much more similar to TypeScript and Kotlin than C and Lisp. 
But it still gives you complete control over the TVM assembler since it has a FunC kernel inside.

1. Functions are declared via `fun`, get methods via `get`, variables via `var`, immutable variables via `val`, putting types on the right; parameter types are mandatory; return type can be omitted (auto inferred), as well as for locals; specifiers `inline` and others are `@` attributes
```tolk
global storedV: int;

fun parseData(cs: slice): cell {
    var flags: int = cs.loadMessageFlags();
    ...
}

@inline
fun sum(a: int, b: int) {   // auto inferred int
    val both = a + b;       // same
    return both;
}

get currentCounter(): int { ... }
```
2. No `impure`, it's by default, the Tolk compiler won't drop user function calls
3. Not `recv_internal` and `recv_external`, but `onInternalMessage` and `onExternalMessage`
4. `2+2` is 4, not an identifier; identifiers are alpha-numeric; use naming `const OP_INCREASE` instead of `const op::increase`; `cell` and `slice` are valid identifiers (not keywords)
5. Logical operators AND `&&`, OR `||`, NOT `!` are supported
6. Syntax improvements:
    - `;; comment` → `// comment`
    - `{- comment -}` → `/* comment */`
    - `#include` → `import`, with a strict rule "import what you use"
    - `~ found` → `!found` (for true/false only, obviously) (true is -1, like in FunC)
    - `v = null()` → `v = null`
    - `null?(v)` → `v == null`, same for `builder_null?` and others
    - `~ null?(v)` → `c != null`
    - `throw(excNo)` → `throw excNo`
    - `catch(_, _)` → `catch`
    - `catch(_, excNo)` → `catch(excNo)`
    - `throw_unless(excNo, cond)` → `assert(cond, excNo)`
    - `throw_if(excNo, cond)` → `assert(!cond, excNo)`
    - `return ()` → `return`
    - `do ... until (cond)` → `do ... while (!cond)`
    - `elseif` → `else if`
    - `ifnot (cond)` → `if (!cond)`
    - `"..."c` → `stringCrc32("...")` (and other postfixes also)
7. A function can be called even if declared below; forward declarations not needed; the compiler at first does parsing, and then it does symbol resolving; there is now an AST representation of source code
8. stdlib functions renamed to ~~verbose~~ clear names, camelCase style; it's now embedded, not downloaded from GitHub; it's split into several files; common functions available always, more specific available with `import "@stdlib/tvm-dicts"`, IDE will suggest you; here is [a mapping](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/tolk/tolk-vs-func/stdlib)
9. No `~` tilda methods; `cs.loadInt(32)` modifies a slice and returns an integer; `b.storeInt(x, 32)` modifies a builder; `b = b.storeInt()` also works since it is not only modifies but returns; chained methods work identically to JS, they return `self`; everything works exactly as expected, similar to JS; no runtime overhead, exactly same Fift instructions; custom methods are created with ease; tilda `~` does not exist in Tolk at all; [more details here](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/tolk/tolk-vs-func/mutability)
10. Clear and readable error messages on type mismatch
11. `bool` type support
12. Indexed access `tensorVar.0` and `tupleVar.0` support
13. Nullable types `T?`, null safety, smart casts, operator `!`
14. Union types and pattern matching (for types and for expressions, switch-like behavior)
15. Type aliases are supported
16. Structures are supported
17. Generics are supported
18. Methods (as extension functions) are supported
19. Trailing comma is supported
20. Semicolon after the last statement in a block is optional
21. Fift output contains original .tolk lines as comments

#### Tooling around
- JetBrains plugin exists
- VS Code extension [exists](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/tolk-vscode)
- WASM wrapper for blueprint [exists](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/tolk-js)
- And even a converter from FunC to Tolk [exists](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/convert-func-to-tolk)

## See also

- [Tolk vs FunC: in detail](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/tolk/tolk-vs-func/in-detail)

<Feedback />
