docs/v3/contribute/tutorials/principles-of-a-good-tutorial.md, before:

# Principles of a good tutorial

Original comment with these principles by [talkol](https://github.com/talkol):

 - [Original comment on TON Footstep #7](https://github.com/ton-society/ton-footsteps/issues/7#issuecomment-1187581181)

Here is a summary of these points for new contributors.

## Principles

1. The full flow should run on the user's client. There shouldn't be any third-party services involved. You need to do everything so that the user can simply clone the repository and immediately run it.

2. The README should be VERY detailed. Do not assume the users know anything. If the tutorial requires it, it should also explain how to install the FunC compiler or Lite-client on your device. You can copy these parts from other tutorials in this documentation.

3. It would be good if the repository included the whole source code for the contracts used, so that users could make minor changes to the standard code. For example, the Jetton smart contract allows users to experiment with custom behavior.

4. If it is possible, create a user-friendly interface that will allow users to deploy or run the project without having to download the code or configure anything. Notice that this should still be standalone and served from GitHub Pages to run 100% client-side on the user's device. Example: https://minter.ton.org/

5. Explain to users what every field choice means and explain best practices.

6. Explain everything there is to know about security. You must explain enough that creators do not make mistakes and create dangerous smart contracts/bots/websites—you are teaching them the best security practices.

7. Ideally, the repository should include well-written tests that show the reader how to best implement them in the context of your tutorial.

8. The repository should have its own easy-to-understand compilation/deployment scripts. A user should be able to just `npm install` and use them.

9. Sometimes a GitHub repository is enough and there is no need to write a full article. Just a README with all the code you need in the repository. In this case, the code should be well-commented so that the user can easily read and understand it.

Commit message:

Doc editor guidelines (#947)
* update_contributors_list

* init_commit

* add_sidebar

* add_style_guide_drafts

* fix_typos

* add_linking_policy

* add_contribute_rules

* update_wordlist

* update_cspell

* update_editor_guidelines

* update_content_and_style

* Readme_proofread

* proofread content-standardization.mdx

* Update README.md

* Update content-standardization.mdx

* Proofread content-standardization.mdx

* clarify_contribution_flow

* mark_outdated_page

* typography_proofread

* style-guide.mdx_proofread

* typography_proofread

* maintainers_proofread

* typography_proofread

* content-standardization_proofread

* fix_formatting_and_beauty

docs/v3/contribute/tutorials/principles-of-a-good-tutorial.md, after:

# Principles of a good tutorial

:::danger
This page is outdated and will be updated soon.
See the [How to contribute](/v3/contribute/).
:::

Original comment with these principles by [talkol](https://github.com/talkol):

 - [Original comment on TON Footstep #7](https://github.com/ton-society/ton-footsteps/issues/7#issuecomment-1187581181)

Here is a summary of these points for new contributors.

## Principles

1. The full flow should run on the user's client. There shouldn't be any third-party services involved. You need to do everything so that the user can simply clone the repository and immediately run it.

2. The README should be VERY detailed. Do not assume the users know anything. If the tutorial requires it, it should also explain how to install the FunC compiler or Lite-client on your device. You can copy these parts from other tutorials in this documentation.

3. It would be good if the repository included the whole source code for the contracts used, so that users could make minor changes to the standard code. For example, the Jetton smart contract allows users to experiment with custom behavior.

4. If it is possible, create a user-friendly interface that will allow users to deploy or run the project without having to download the code or configure anything. Notice that this should still be standalone and served from GitHub Pages to run 100% client-side on the user's device. Example: https://minter.ton.org/

5. Explain to users what every field choice means and explain best practices.

6. Explain everything there is to know about security. You must explain enough that creators do not make mistakes and create dangerous smart contracts/bots/websites—you are teaching them the best security practices.

7. Ideally, the repository should include well-written tests that show the reader how to best implement them in the context of your tutorial.

8. The repository should have its own easy-to-understand compilation/deployment scripts. A user should be able to just `npm install` and use them.

9. Sometimes a GitHub repository is enough and there is no need to write a full article. Just a README with all the code you need in the repository. In this case, the code should be well-commented so that the user can easily read and understand it.
