docs/develop/dapps/telegram-apps/README.mdx, before:

---
description: Telegram Web Apps (or TWAs) are web applications that run inside the Telegram messenger. They are built using web technologies — HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.
---
import Button from '@site/src/components/button'

# What is TWA?

<div style={{width: '100%', textAlign:'center', margin: '10pt auto'}}>
  <video style={{width: '100%',maxWidth: '600px', borderRadius: '10pt'}} muted={true} autoPlay={true} loop={true}>
    <source src="/files/twa.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
    Your browser does not support the video tag.
  </video>
</div>

Telegram Web Apps (or TWAs) are web applications that run inside the Telegram messenger. They are built using web technologies — HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.

Unlock the gateway to an **800 million-strong Telegram audience**. Imagine offering your app or service to this massive user base with just a single click.

<Button href="/develop/dapps/telegram-apps/step-by-step-guide" colorType={'primary'} sizeType={'sm'}>Step-By-Step Guide</Button>
<Button href="/develop/dapps/telegram-apps/app-examples" colorType={'secondary'} sizeType={'sm'}>See Examples</Button>

## Overview

Telegram bots can completely replace any website. They support seamless authorization, integrated payments via 20 payment providers (with Google Pay and Apple Pay out of the box), delivering tailored push notifications to users, and much more.

With Web Apps, bots get a whole new dimension. Bot developers can create infinitely flexible interfaces with JavaScript, the most widely used programming language in the world.

Here are some key points about Telegram Web Apps:

- **Integration within Telegram**: Telegram Web Apps are intended to seamlessly integrate into the Telegram app, providing users with a cohesive experience. They can be accessed from within a Telegram chat or group conversation.
- **Enhanced Functionality**: Telegram Web Apps can offer a wide range of functionalities. They can be used for various purposes, such as gaming, content sharing, productivity tools, and more. These apps extend the capabilities of the Telegram platform beyond basic messaging.
- **Cross-Platform Compatibility**: Since Telegram Web Apps are web-based, they are available on Android, iOS, PC, Mac and Linux Telegram apps. Users can access them without the need for additional installations in one click.
- **Bot Interaction**: Telegram Web Apps often make use of Telegram bots to provide interactive and automated experiences. Bots can respond to user input, perform tasks, and facilitate interactions within the web app.
- **Development Frameworks**: Developers can build Telegram Web Apps using web development technologies like HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. Additionally, Telegram provides developer tools and APIs for creating these apps and integrating them with the Telegram platform.
- **Monetization Opportunities**: Telegram Web Apps can be monetized in various ways, such as through in-app purchases, subscription models, or advertising, making them attractive to developers and businesses.
- **Web3 Ready**: TON SDK; TON Connect is a communication protocol between wallets and apps in TON; Tokens
- **Community Development**: Telegram has a thriving developer community, and many third-party developers create and share their Telegram Web Apps with users. This community-driven approach fosters innovation and diversity in the available apps.

Overall, Telegram Web Apps serve as a means to enhance the Telegram experience by offering additional functionalities and services, while also providing developers with an opportunity to create and distribute their applications within the Telegram ecosystem.

## Getting Started

### TWA Documentation

- [Telegram Web Apps Documentation](https://docs.twa.dev/docs/introduction/about-platform) — a community-driven documentation for TWA.
- [TWA Documentation by Telegram](https://core.telegram.org/bots/webapps) — full description on Telegram website.

### Telegram Developers Community

Join a special Telegram Developers Chat to discuss TWA development and get support:

<Button href="https://t.me/+1mQMqTopB1FkNjIy" colorType={'primary'} sizeType={'sm'}>Join Chat</Button>

### Web Apps SDKs

- [twa-dev/sdk](https://github.com/twa-dev/sdk) — NPM package for TWA SDK
- [twa-dev/boilerplate](https://github.com/twa-dev/Boilerplate) — another boilerplate for a new TWA.
- [twa-dev/Mark42](https://github.com/twa-dev/Mark42) — Mark42 is a simple lightweight tree-shakable UI library for TWA.
- [ton-defi-org/tonstarter-twa](https://github.com/ton-defi-org/tonstarter-twa) — template for new TWA interaction with TON.

## Integrate with TON Connect

Connect with users wallets with the help of TON Connect protocol. Read more about it here:

<Button href="/develop/dapps/ton-connect/overview" colorType={'primary'} sizeType={'sm'}>Discover TON Connect</Button>

Commit message:

rename twa -> tma, web apps -> mini apps

docs/develop/dapps/telegram-apps/README.mdx, after:

---
description: Telegram Mini Apps (or TMAs) are web applications that run inside the Telegram messenger. They are built using web technologies — HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.
---
import Button from '@site/src/components/button'

# What is TWA?

<div style={{width: '100%', textAlign:'center', margin: '10pt auto'}}>
  <video style={{width: '100%',maxWidth: '600px', borderRadius: '10pt'}} muted={true} autoPlay={true} loop={true}>
    <source src="/files/twa.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
    Your browser does not support the video tag.
  </video>
</div>

Telegram Mini Apps (or TMAs) are web applications that run inside the Telegram messenger. They are built using web technologies — HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.

Unlock the gateway to an **800 million-strong Telegram audience**. Imagine offering your app or service to this massive user base with just a single click.

<Button href="/develop/dapps/telegram-apps/step-by-step-guide" colorType={'primary'} sizeType={'sm'}>Step-By-Step Guide</Button>
<Button href="/develop/dapps/telegram-apps/app-examples" colorType={'secondary'} sizeType={'sm'}>See Examples</Button>

## Overview

Telegram bots can completely replace any website. They support seamless authorization, integrated payments via 20 payment providers (with Google Pay and Apple Pay out of the box), delivering tailored push notifications to users, and much more.

With Web Apps, bots get a whole new dimension. Bot developers can create infinitely flexible interfaces with JavaScript, the most widely used programming language in the world.

Here are some key points about Telegram Mini Apps:

- **Integration within Telegram**: Telegram Mini Apps are intended to seamlessly integrate into the Telegram app, providing users with a cohesive experience. They can be accessed from within a Telegram chat or group conversation.
- **Enhanced Functionality**: Telegram Mini Apps can offer a wide range of functionalities. They can be used for various purposes, such as gaming, content sharing, productivity tools, and more. These apps extend the capabilities of the Telegram platform beyond basic messaging.
- **Cross-Platform Compatibility**: Since Telegram Mini Apps are web-based, they are available on Android, iOS, PC, Mac and Linux Telegram apps. Users can access them without the need for additional installations in one click.
- **Bot Interaction**: Telegram Mini Apps often make use of Telegram bots to provide interactive and automated experiences. Bots can respond to user input, perform tasks, and facilitate interactions within the web app.
- **Development Frameworks**: Developers can build Telegram Mini Apps using web development technologies like HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. Additionally, Telegram provides developer tools and APIs for creating these apps and integrating them with the Telegram platform.
- **Monetization Opportunities**: Telegram Mini Apps can be monetized in various ways, such as through in-app purchases, subscription models, or advertising, making them attractive to developers and businesses.
- **Web3 Ready**: TON SDK; TON Connect is a communication protocol between wallets and apps in TON; Tokens
- **Community Development**: Telegram has a thriving developer community, and many third-party developers create and share their Telegram Mini Apps with users. This community-driven approach fosters innovation and diversity in the available apps.

Overall, Telegram Mini Apps serve as a means to enhance the Telegram experience by offering additional functionalities and services, while also providing developers with an opportunity to create and distribute their applications within the Telegram ecosystem.

## Getting Started

### TMA Documentation

- [Telegram Mini Apps Documentation](https://docs.twa.dev/docs/introduction/about-platform) — a community-driven documentation for TWA.
- [TMA Documentation by Telegram](https://core.telegram.org/bots/webapps) — full description on Telegram website.

### Telegram Developers Community

Join a special Telegram Developers Chat to discuss TWA development and get support:

<Button href="https://t.me/+1mQMqTopB1FkNjIy" colorType={'primary'} sizeType={'sm'}>Join Chat</Button>

### Web Apps SDKs

- [twa-dev/sdk](https://github.com/twa-dev/sdk) — NPM package for TWA SDK
- [twa-dev/boilerplate](https://github.com/twa-dev/Boilerplate) — another boilerplate for a new TWA.
- [twa-dev/Mark42](https://github.com/twa-dev/Mark42) — Mark42 is a simple lightweight tree-shakable UI library for TWA.
- [ton-defi-org/tonstarter-twa](https://github.com/ton-defi-org/tonstarter-twa) — template for new TWA interaction with TON.

## Integrate with TON Connect

Connect with users wallets with the help of TON Connect protocol. Read more about it here:

<Button href="/develop/dapps/ton-connect/overview" colorType={'primary'} sizeType={'sm'}>Discover TON Connect</Button>
