docs/develop/dapps/telegram-apps/testing-apps.mdx, before:

import ConceptImage from '@site/src/components/conceptImage'

# Testing Mini Apps

## Using bots in the test environment

To log in to the test environment, use either of the following:

- **iOS:** tap 10 times on the Settings icon > Accounts > Login to another account > Test.
- **Telegram Desktop:** open ☰ Settings > Shift + Alt + Right click ‘Add Account’ and select ‘Test Server’.
- **macOS:** click the Settings icon 10 times to open the Debug Menu, ⌘ + click ‘Add Account’ and log in via phone number.

The test environment is completely separate from the main environment, so you will need to create a **new user account** and a **new bot** with @BotFather.

After receiving your bot token, you can send requests to the Bot API in this format:

`https://api.telegram.org/bot<token>/test/METHOD_NAME`

**Note:** When working with the test environment, you may use HTTP links without TLS to test your Mini App.

## Debug Mode for Mini Apps

Use these tools to find app-specific issues in your Mini App:

### Android

- [Enable USB-Debugging](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/remote-debugging/) on your device.
- In Telegram Settings, scroll all the way down, press and hold on the **version number** two times.
- Choose *Enable WebView Debug* in the Debug Settings.
- Connect your phone to your computer and open chrome://inspect/#devices in Chrome – you will see your Mini App there when you launch it on your phone.

### Telegram Desktop on Windows and Linux

- Download and launch the [Beta Version](https://desktop.telegram.org/changelog#beta-version) of Telegram Desktop on **Windows** or **Linux** (not supported on Telegram Desktop for macOS yet).
- Go to *Settings > Advanced > Experimental settings > Enable webview inspection*.
- Right click in the WebView and choose *Inspect*.

### Telegram macOS

- Download and launch the [Beta Version](https://telegram.org/dl/macos/beta) of Telegram macOS.
- Quickly click 5 times on the Settings icon to open the debug menu and enable “Debug Mini Apps”.

Right click in the mini app and choose *Inspect Element*.

## Testing with Eruda

[Eruda](https://github.com/liriliri/eruda) is a tool that provides a web-based console for debugging and inspecting web pages on mobile devices and desktop browsers. Here's a step-by-step guide on how to use Eruda in a Telegram Mini Apps project.

![1](/img/docs/telegram-apps/eruda-1.png)

### Step 1: Include Eruda Library

First, you need to include the Eruda library in your HTML file. You can include it from a CDN:

```html
<!-- Include Eruda from CDN (Recommended) -->
<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/eruda"></script>
```

Or you can get it on npm.

```bash npm2yarn
npm install eruda --save
```

### Step 2: Initialise Eruda

Next, you need to initialize Eruda. You typically do this when the web page loads. In case you run Eruda from CDN.

```html
<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/eruda"></script>
<script>
  // Initialize Eruda
  eruda.init();
</script>

```

If you prefer modern tooling and packages add this script to your project:

```jsx
import eruda from 'eruda'

eruda.init()
```

### Step 3: Launch Eruda

Deploy your Mini App, launch it and just press Eruda icon to start debugging!

<ConceptImage style={{maxWidth:'200pt', margin: '10pt 20pt 0 0', display: 'flex-box'}} src="/img/docs/telegram-apps/eruda-2.png" />
<ConceptImage style={{maxWidth:'200pt', margin: '10pt 20pt', display: 'flex-box'}}  src="/img/docs/telegram-apps/eruda-3.png" />

Commit message:

Update instructions how to access web console in Telegram desktop
Instructions were outdated

docs/develop/dapps/telegram-apps/testing-apps.mdx, after:

import ConceptImage from '@site/src/components/conceptImage'

# Testing Mini Apps

## Using bots in the test environment

To log in to the test environment, use either of the following:

- **iOS:** tap 10 times on the Settings icon > Accounts > Login to another account > Test.
- **Telegram Desktop:** open ☰ Settings > Shift + Alt + Right click ‘Add Account’ and select ‘Test Server’.
- **macOS:** click the Settings icon 10 times to open the Debug Menu, ⌘ + click ‘Add Account’ and log in via phone number.

The test environment is completely separate from the main environment, so you will need to create a **new user account** and a **new bot** with @BotFather.

After receiving your bot token, you can send requests to the Bot API in this format:

`https://api.telegram.org/bot<token>/test/METHOD_NAME`

**Note:** When working with the test environment, you may use HTTP links without TLS to test your Mini App.

## Debug Mode for Mini Apps

Use these tools to find app-specific issues in your Mini App:

### Android

- [Enable USB-Debugging](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/remote-debugging/) on your device.
- In Telegram Settings, scroll all the way down, press and hold on the **version number** two times.
- Choose *Enable WebView Debug* in the Debug Settings.
- Connect your phone to your computer and open chrome://inspect/#devices in Chrome – you will see your Mini App there when you launch it on your phone.

### Telegram Desktop on Windows, Linux and macOS

- Download and launch the latest version of Telegram Desktop on **Windows**, **Linux** or **macOS** (as the writing of this version 5.0.1 is available)
- Go to *Settings > Advanced > Experimental settings > Enable webview inspection*.
- on Windows and Linux, right-click in the WebView and choose *Inspect*.
- On macOS, you need to access the Inspect through [Safari Developer menu](https://support.apple.com/en-gb/guide/safari/sfri20948/mac)
  and Inspect is not available through the right-click context menu

### Telegram macOS

- Download and launch the [Beta Version](https://telegram.org/dl/macos/beta) of Telegram macOS.
- Quickly click 5 times on the Settings icon to open the debug menu and enable “Debug Mini Apps”.

Right click in the mini app and choose *Inspect Element*.

## Testing with Eruda

[Eruda](https://github.com/liriliri/eruda) is a tool that provides a web-based console for debugging and inspecting web pages on mobile devices and desktop browsers. Here's a step-by-step guide on how to use Eruda in a Telegram Mini Apps project.

![1](/img/docs/telegram-apps/eruda-1.png)

### Step 1: Include Eruda Library

First, you need to include the Eruda library in your HTML file. You can include it from a CDN:

```html
<!-- Include Eruda from CDN (Recommended) -->
<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/eruda"></script>
```

Or you can get it on npm.

```bash npm2yarn
npm install eruda --save
```

### Step 2: Initialise Eruda

Next, you need to initialize Eruda. You typically do this when the web page loads. In case you run Eruda from CDN.

```html
<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/eruda"></script>
<script>
  // Initialize Eruda
  eruda.init();
</script>

```

If you prefer modern tooling and packages add this script to your project:

```jsx
import eruda from 'eruda'

eruda.init()
```

### Step 3: Launch Eruda

Deploy your Mini App, launch it and just press Eruda icon to start debugging!

<ConceptImage style={{maxWidth:'200pt', margin: '10pt 20pt 0 0', display: 'flex-box'}} src="/img/docs/telegram-apps/eruda-2.png" />
<ConceptImage style={{maxWidth:'200pt', margin: '10pt 20pt', display: 'flex-box'}}  src="/img/docs/telegram-apps/eruda-3.png" />
