docs/v3/concepts/dive-into-ton/ton-ecosystem/explorers-in-ton.mdx, before:

import Player from "@site/src/components/player";
import Feedback from "@site/src/components/Feedback";

# Explorers in TON

This article will consider TON explorers and their capabilities and features from the user's perspective.

## What is an explorer?

An explorer is a website that allows you to view information in a blockchain, such as the account balance, transaction history, and blocks.

<Player url="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i5en19kzX6M" />

## Which explorers exist?

Among TON explorers, you can distinguish several categories:

- For everyday use
- With extended information for developers
- Specialized

This division into categories is mainly conditional, and one explorer can belong to several categories simultaneously. So let's not pay too much attention to this.

## General functionality

Blockchain explorers allow you to view and search the blockchain, similarly to how you might use a banking app to check transaction history and account balances. They provide a user-friendly interface to access real-time data about blockchain transactions, blocks, and addresses.

Just as you use a banking app to track where your money goes, who sends you payments, and when transactions occur, blockchain explorers let you see this information for digital assets on the blockchain. They are essential for transparency, allowing anyone to verify transactions independently, see the flow of cryptocurrency, and analyze the activity on the blockchain.

Typically, an explorer allows you to find a transaction or an account by its identifier. Some explorers also support DNS extensions or their own [address book](/v3/concepts/dive-into-ton/ton-ecosystem/explorers-in-ton#address-alias-in-explorers), which adds a human-readable label to a specific account. Example: [TON Foundation](https://tonviewer.com/UQAFmjUoZUqKFEBGYFEMbv-m61sFStgAfUR8J6hJDwUU04VW).

## Native explorers

### Tonscan

It is a good explorer for everyday use. It provides a comprehensive view of the TON Blockchain, allowing users to search for transactions, addresses, blocks, and more.

- Mainnet: [tonscan.org](https://tonscan.org/)
- Testnet: [testnet.tonscan.org](https://testnet.tonscan.org/)

#### Features

- Convenient for everyday use and developers
- Advanced jetton and nominator pools pages for users
- Contract types and disassembler
- User-friendly search uses DNS and [address book](https://github.com/catchain/address-book) labels.

### Tonviewer

It is a good explorer for everyday use with a balanced UI for users and developers.

- Mainnet: [tonviewer.com](https://tonviewer.com/)
- Testnet: [testnet.tonviewer.com](https://testnet.tonviewer.com/)

#### Features

- Convenient for everyday use and developers
- Advanced information for developers with traces
- Contract types and disassembler
- User-friendly search uses DNS and [tonkeeper/ton-assets](https://github.com/tonkeeper/ton-assets) labels.

### Tonscan by Bastion

- Mainnet: [tonscan.com](https://tonscan.com/)

#### Features

- Transaction aggregation analytics
- Transaction traces

### DTON

DTON is another explorer for developers. It provides a lot of information about transactions in a convenient form.

It also has a feature that allows you to see the computation phase of the transaction step by step.

- Mainnet: [dton.io](https://dton.io/)

#### Features

- Convenient for developers
- Extended information about the computation phase
- Contract types and disassembler

### Ton Whales explorer

Explorer for developers.

- Mainnet: [tonwhales.com/explorer](https://tonwhales.com/explorer)

#### Features

- Convenient for developers
- Contract types and disassembler
- Simple and convenient validator details

### TON NFT EXPLORER

This explorer specializes in NFTs but is also suitable as a regular explorer.

- Mainnet: [explorer.tonnft.tools](https://explorer.tonnft.tools/)
- Testnet: [testnet.explorer.tonnft.tools](https://testnet.explorer.tonnft.tools/)

When viewing the wallet address, you can find out which NFT it stores, and when viewing the NFT, you can find the metadata, collection address, owner, and transaction history.

#### Features

- Convenient for developers
- Specialized in NFT
- Contract types

## Crosschain explorers

### OKX TON explorer

This explorer is designed to provide comprehensive and detailed data insights into TON. Whether you're tracking wallet addresses, exploring Jetton tokens, or delving into NFT collections, it offers a user-friendly experience tailored for both beginners and developers.

- Mainnet: [web3.okx.com/explorer/ton](https://web3.okx.com/explorer/ton)

#### Features

- Convenient for everyday use
- TON DNS support
- Jetton and NFT data

### TON NFTscan

This explorer is designed explicitly for Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) on the TON Blockchain. It allows users to explore, track, and verify NFT transactions, contracts, and metadata.

- Mainnet: [ton.nftscan.com](https://ton.nftscan.com/)

#### Features

- Convenient for regular users
- NFT collection ranking
- Useful information for traders, such as daily volume

## Analytics explorers

### TonStat

- Mainnet: [tonstat.com](https://www.tonstat.com/)

It displays various statistics, such as the number of registered network addresses and wallets, the volume of Toncoin burned, the volume of Toncoin staked, the volume of NFTs issued, the number of validators, and other metrics.

#### Features

- Convenient for regular users
- DeFi information
- Useful information for traders, such as daily volume

## Address alias in explorers

Make your service address more user-friendly by using an address alias. Create Pull Requests (PRs) according to the provided guidelines:

- [tonkeeper/ton-assets](https://github.com/tonkeeper/ton-assets) - Tonviewer.com alias
- [catchain/address-book](https://github.com/catchain/address-book)- Tonscan.org alias
- [ton-labels](https://github.com/ton-studio/ton-labels) - Public dataset of labeled TON blockchain addresses

## Want to be on this list?

Please write to one of the [maintainers](/v3/contribute/maintainers).

## See also

- [TON wallet apps](/v3/concepts/dive-into-ton/ton-ecosystem/wallet-apps/)
- [ton.app/explorers](https://ton.app/explorers)
- [Awesome TON repository](https://github.com/ton-community/awesome-ton)

<Feedback />

Commit message:

Add DYOR to analytics explorers section

docs/v3/concepts/dive-into-ton/ton-ecosystem/explorers-in-ton.mdx, after:

import Player from "@site/src/components/player";
import Feedback from "@site/src/components/Feedback";

# Explorers in TON

This article will consider TON explorers and their capabilities and features from the user's perspective.

## What is an explorer?

An explorer is a website that allows you to view information in a blockchain, such as the account balance, transaction history, and blocks.

<Player url="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i5en19kzX6M" />

## Which explorers exist?

Among TON explorers, you can distinguish several categories:

- For everyday use
- With extended information for developers
- Specialized

This division into categories is mainly conditional, and one explorer can belong to several categories simultaneously. So let's not pay too much attention to this.

## General functionality

Blockchain explorers allow you to view and search the blockchain, similarly to how you might use a banking app to check transaction history and account balances. They provide a user-friendly interface to access real-time data about blockchain transactions, blocks, and addresses.

Just as you use a banking app to track where your money goes, who sends you payments, and when transactions occur, blockchain explorers let you see this information for digital assets on the blockchain. They are essential for transparency, allowing anyone to verify transactions independently, see the flow of cryptocurrency, and analyze the activity on the blockchain.

Typically, an explorer allows you to find a transaction or an account by its identifier. Some explorers also support DNS extensions or their own [address book](/v3/concepts/dive-into-ton/ton-ecosystem/explorers-in-ton#address-alias-in-explorers), which adds a human-readable label to a specific account. Example: [TON Foundation](https://tonviewer.com/UQAFmjUoZUqKFEBGYFEMbv-m61sFStgAfUR8J6hJDwUU04VW).

## Native explorers

### Tonscan

It is a good explorer for everyday use. It provides a comprehensive view of the TON Blockchain, allowing users to search for transactions, addresses, blocks, and more.

- Mainnet: [tonscan.org](https://tonscan.org/)
- Testnet: [testnet.tonscan.org](https://testnet.tonscan.org/)

#### Features

- Convenient for everyday use and developers
- Advanced jetton and nominator pools pages for users
- Contract types and disassembler
- User-friendly search uses DNS and [address book](https://github.com/catchain/address-book) labels.

### Tonviewer

It is a good explorer for everyday use with a balanced UI for users and developers.

- Mainnet: [tonviewer.com](https://tonviewer.com/)
- Testnet: [testnet.tonviewer.com](https://testnet.tonviewer.com/)

#### Features

- Convenient for everyday use and developers
- Advanced information for developers with traces
- Contract types and disassembler
- User-friendly search uses DNS and [tonkeeper/ton-assets](https://github.com/tonkeeper/ton-assets) labels.

### Tonscan by Bastion

- Mainnet: [tonscan.com](https://tonscan.com/)

#### Features

- Transaction aggregation analytics
- Transaction traces

### DTON

DTON is another explorer for developers. It provides a lot of information about transactions in a convenient form.

It also has a feature that allows you to see the computation phase of the transaction step by step.

- Mainnet: [dton.io](https://dton.io/)

#### Features

- Convenient for developers
- Extended information about the computation phase
- Contract types and disassembler

### Ton Whales explorer

Explorer for developers.

- Mainnet: [tonwhales.com/explorer](https://tonwhales.com/explorer)

#### Features

- Convenient for developers
- Contract types and disassembler
- Simple and convenient validator details

### TON NFT EXPLORER

This explorer specializes in NFTs but is also suitable as a regular explorer.

- Mainnet: [explorer.tonnft.tools](https://explorer.tonnft.tools/)
- Testnet: [testnet.explorer.tonnft.tools](https://testnet.explorer.tonnft.tools/)

When viewing the wallet address, you can find out which NFT it stores, and when viewing the NFT, you can find the metadata, collection address, owner, and transaction history.

#### Features

- Convenient for developers
- Specialized in NFT
- Contract types

## Crosschain explorers

### OKX TON explorer

This explorer is designed to provide comprehensive and detailed data insights into TON. Whether you're tracking wallet addresses, exploring Jetton tokens, or delving into NFT collections, it offers a user-friendly experience tailored for both beginners and developers.

- Mainnet: [web3.okx.com/explorer/ton](https://web3.okx.com/explorer/ton)

#### Features

- Convenient for everyday use
- TON DNS support
- Jetton and NFT data

### TON NFTscan

This explorer is designed explicitly for Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) on the TON Blockchain. It allows users to explore, track, and verify NFT transactions, contracts, and metadata.

- Mainnet: [ton.nftscan.com](https://ton.nftscan.com/)

#### Features

- Convenient for regular users
- NFT collection ranking
- Useful information for traders, such as daily volume

## Analytics explorers

### TonStat

- Mainnet: [tonstat.com](https://www.tonstat.com/)

It displays various statistics, such as the number of registered network addresses and wallets, the volume of Toncoin burned, the volume of Toncoin staked, the volume of NFTs issued, the number of validators, and other metrics.

#### Features

- Convenient for regular users
- DeFi information
- Useful information for traders, such as daily volume

### DYOR

An advanced analytics platform focused on tokens, trader behavior, and on-chain activity. It offers detailed charts for token prices, liquidity, holders, market cap, and historical data.

- Mainnet: [dyor.io](https://dyor.io)

#### Features

- Real-time charts for price, liquidity, holders, and market data
- Advanced filters to track DEX swaps by wallet, volume, token, or timeframe
- Visual token explorer with trust scores and trend indicators
- Built-in token swap via DeDust Router
- Telegram alerts through mini app
- Developer-friendly API

## Address alias in explorers

Make your service address more user-friendly by using an address alias. Create Pull Requests (PRs) according to the provided guidelines:

- [tonkeeper/ton-assets](https://github.com/tonkeeper/ton-assets) - Tonviewer.com alias
- [catchain/address-book](https://github.com/catchain/address-book)- Tonscan.org alias
- [ton-labels](https://github.com/ton-studio/ton-labels) - Public dataset of labeled TON blockchain addresses

## Want to be on this list?

Please write to one of the [maintainers](/v3/contribute/maintainers).

## See also

- [TON wallet apps](/v3/concepts/dive-into-ton/ton-ecosystem/wallet-apps/)
- [ton.app/explorers](https://ton.app/explorers)
- [Awesome TON repository](https://github.com/ton-community/awesome-ton)

<Feedback />
