docs/develop/smart-contracts/guidelines/internal-messages.md, before:

# Internal messages

Smart contracts interact with each other by sending so-called **internal messages**. When an internal message reaches its intended destination, an ordinary transaction is created on behalf of the destination account, and the internal message is processed as specified by the code and the persistent data of this account (smart contract). 

:::info
In particular, the processing transaction can create one or several outbound internal messages, some of which could be addressed to the source address of the internal message being processed. This can be used to create simple "client-server applications" when a query is encapsulated in an internal message and sent to another smart contract, which processes the query and sends back a response again as an internal message.
:::

This approach leads to the necessity of distinguishing whether an internal message is intended as a "query", "response", or doesn't require any additional processing (like a "simple money transfer"). Furthermore, when a response is received, there must be a means to understand to which query it corresponds.

In order to achieve this goal, the following recommended internal message layout can be used (notice that the TON Blockchain does not enforce any restrictions on the message body, so these are indeed just recommendations):

1. The body of the message can be embedded into the message itself, or be stored in a separate cell referred to from the message, as indicated by the TL-B scheme fragment:

```cpp
message$_ {X:Type} ... body:(Either X ^X) = Message X;
```

The receiving smart contract should accept at least internal messages with embedded message bodies (whenever they fit into the cell containing the message). If it accepts message bodies in separate cells (using the `right` constructor of `(Either X ^X)`), the processing of the inbound message should not depend on the specific embedding option chosen for the message body. On the other hand, it is perfectly valid not to support message bodies in separate cells at all for simpler queries and responses.

2. The message body typically begins with the following fields:

    * A 32-bit (big-endian) unsigned integer `op`, identifying the `operation` to be performed, or the `method` of the smart contract to be invoked.
    * A 64-bit (big-endian) unsigned integer `query_id`, used in all query-response internal messages to indicate that a response is related to a query (the `query_id` of a response must be equal to the `query_id` of the corresponding query). If `op` is not a query-response method (e.g., it invokes a method that is not expected to send an answer), then `query_id` may be omitted.
    * The remainder of the message body is specific for each supported value of `op`.

3. If `op` is zero, then the message is a "simple transfer message with comment". The comment is contained in the remainder of the message body (without any `query_id` field, i.e., starting from the fifth byte). If it does not begin with the byte `0xff`, the comment is a text one; it can be displayed "as is" to the end user of a wallet (after filtering out invalid and control characters and checking that it is a valid UTF-8 string). 

   For instance, users may indicate the purpose of a simple transfer from their wallet to the wallet of another user in this text field. On the other hand, if the comment begins with the byte `0xff`, the remainder is a "binary comment", which should not be displayed to the end user as text (only as a hex dump if necessary). The intended use of "binary comments" is, e.g., to contain a purchase identifier for payments in a store, to be automatically generated and processed by the store's software.

   Most smart contracts should not perform non-trivial actions or reject the inbound message on receiving a "simple transfer message". In this way, once `op` is found to be zero, the smart contract function for processing inbound internal messages (usually called `recv_internal()`) should immediately terminate with a zero exit code indicating success (e.g., by throwing exception `0`, if no custom exception handler has been installed by the smart contract). This will lead to the receiving account being credited with the value transferred by the message without any further effect.

4. A "simple transfer message without comment" has an empty body (without even an `op` field). The above considerations apply to such messages as well. Note that such messages should have their bodies embedded into the message cell.

5. We expect "query" messages to have an `op` with the high-order bit clear, i.e., in the range `1 .. 2^31-1`, and "response" messages to have an `op` with the high-order bit set, i.e., in the range `2^31 .. 2^32-1`. If a method is neither a query nor a response (so that the corresponding message body does not contain a `query_id` field), it should use an `op` in the "query" range `1 .. 2^31 - 1`.

6. There are some "standard" response messages with the `op` equal to `0xffffffff` and `0xfffffffe`. In general, the values of `op` from `0xfffffff0` to `0xffffffff` are reserved for such standard responses.

    * `op` = `0xffffffff` means "operation not supported". It is followed by the 64-bit `query_id` extracted from the original query, and the 32-bit `op` of the original query. All but the simplest smart contracts should return this error when they receive a query with an unknown `op` in the range `1 .. 2^31-1`.
    * `op` = `0xfffffffe` means "operation not allowed". It is followed by the 64-bit `query_id` of the original query, followed by the 32-bit `op` extracted from the original query.

   Notice that unknown "responses" (with an `op` in the range `2^31 .. 2^32-1`) should be ignored (in particular, no response with an `op` equal to `0xffffffff` should be generated in response to them), just as unexpected bounced messages (with the "bounced" flag set).

Commit message:

Add info on long message comments

docs/develop/smart-contracts/guidelines/internal-messages.md, after:

# Internal messages

Smart contracts interact with each other by sending so-called **internal messages**. When an internal message reaches its intended destination, an ordinary transaction is created on behalf of the destination account, and the internal message is processed as specified by the code and the persistent data of this account (smart contract). 

:::info
In particular, the processing transaction can create one or several outbound internal messages, some of which could be addressed to the source address of the internal message being processed. This can be used to create simple "client-server applications" when a query is encapsulated in an internal message and sent to another smart contract, which processes the query and sends back a response again as an internal message.
:::

This approach leads to the necessity of distinguishing whether an internal message is intended as a "query", "response", or doesn't require any additional processing (like a "simple money transfer"). Furthermore, when a response is received, there must be a means to understand to which query it corresponds.

In order to achieve this goal, the following recommended internal message layout can be used (notice that the TON Blockchain does not enforce any restrictions on the message body, so these are indeed just recommendations):

1. The body of the message can be embedded into the message itself, or be stored in a separate cell referred to from the message, as indicated by the TL-B scheme fragment:

```cpp
message$_ {X:Type} ... body:(Either X ^X) = Message X;
```

The receiving smart contract should accept at least internal messages with embedded message bodies (whenever they fit into the cell containing the message). If it accepts message bodies in separate cells (using the `right` constructor of `(Either X ^X)`), the processing of the inbound message should not depend on the specific embedding option chosen for the message body. On the other hand, it is perfectly valid not to support message bodies in separate cells at all for simpler queries and responses.

2. The message body typically begins with the following fields:

    * A 32-bit (big-endian) unsigned integer `op`, identifying the `operation` to be performed, or the `method` of the smart contract to be invoked.
    * A 64-bit (big-endian) unsigned integer `query_id`, used in all query-response internal messages to indicate that a response is related to a query (the `query_id` of a response must be equal to the `query_id` of the corresponding query). If `op` is not a query-response method (e.g., it invokes a method that is not expected to send an answer), then `query_id` may be omitted.
    * The remainder of the message body is specific for each supported value of `op`.

3. If `op` is zero, then the message is a "simple transfer message with comment". The comment is contained in the remainder of the message body (without any `query_id` field, i.e., starting from the fifth byte). If it does not begin with the byte `0xff`, the comment is a text one; it can be displayed "as is" to the end user of a wallet (after filtering out invalid and control characters and checking that it is a valid UTF-8 string). 

   When comment is long enough that it doesn't fit in a cell, non-fitting end of the line is put to the first reference of the cell. This process continues recursively to describe comments that doesn't fit in two or more cells:   
```
root_cell("0x00000000" - 32 bit, "string" up to 123 bytes)
         ↳1st_ref("string continuation" up to 127 bytes)
                 ↳1st_ref("string continuation" up to 127 bytes)
                         ↳....
```
   The same format is used for comments for [jetton transfers](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md#forward_payload-format).
   
   For instance, users may indicate the purpose of a simple transfer from their wallet to the wallet of another user in this text field. On the other hand, if the comment begins with the byte `0xff`, the remainder is a "binary comment", which should not be displayed to the end user as text (only as a hex dump if necessary). The intended use of "binary comments" is, e.g., to contain a purchase identifier for payments in a store, to be automatically generated and processed by the store's software.

   Most smart contracts should not perform non-trivial actions or reject the inbound message on receiving a "simple transfer message". In this way, once `op` is found to be zero, the smart contract function for processing inbound internal messages (usually called `recv_internal()`) should immediately terminate with a zero exit code indicating success (e.g., by throwing exception `0`, if no custom exception handler has been installed by the smart contract). This will lead to the receiving account being credited with the value transferred by the message without any further effect.

4. A "simple transfer message without comment" has an empty body (without even an `op` field). The above considerations apply to such messages as well. Note that such messages should have their bodies embedded into the message cell.

5. We expect "query" messages to have an `op` with the high-order bit clear, i.e., in the range `1 .. 2^31-1`, and "response" messages to have an `op` with the high-order bit set, i.e., in the range `2^31 .. 2^32-1`. If a method is neither a query nor a response (so that the corresponding message body does not contain a `query_id` field), it should use an `op` in the "query" range `1 .. 2^31 - 1`.

6. There are some "standard" response messages with the `op` equal to `0xffffffff` and `0xfffffffe`. In general, the values of `op` from `0xfffffff0` to `0xffffffff` are reserved for such standard responses.

    * `op` = `0xffffffff` means "operation not supported". It is followed by the 64-bit `query_id` extracted from the original query, and the 32-bit `op` of the original query. All but the simplest smart contracts should return this error when they receive a query with an unknown `op` in the range `1 .. 2^31-1`.
    * `op` = `0xfffffffe` means "operation not allowed". It is followed by the 64-bit `query_id` of the original query, followed by the 32-bit `op` extracted from the original query.

   Notice that unknown "responses" (with an `op` in the range `2^31 .. 2^32-1`) should be ignored (in particular, no response with an `op` equal to `0xffffffff` should be generated in response to them), just as unexpected bounced messages (with the "bounced" flag set).
