README.md, before:

<img align="left" width="300px" src="static\img\readme\about.png">

## TON Blockchain Documentation 📚

This is the official repository for The Open Network documentation.

Latest documentation release: [docs.ton.org](https://docs.ton.org)
 
The mission of this documentation is to collect all available information and knowledge that can help TON developers.

You can improve the documentation by following steps below.

---

<img align="right" width="300px" src="static\img\readme\contribute.png">

## Join TON Docs Club 💎

TON is an actively growing ecosystem, and every day many devs contribute to its development. 

You can participate in TON by helping organize knowledge, making Pull Requests and creating tutorials to help other developers. 
Feedback, lectures, technical articles, tutorials, and examples. All this can help the developers community grow even faster!

Join TON Docs Club chat in Telegram to join contributors party:
* https://t.me/+c-0fVO4XHQsyOWM8

---

<img align="left" width="300px" src="static\img\readme\how.png">

## How to Contribute? 🦄

If you are a developer and faced some difficulties, successfully overcoming them - share this knowledge with future developers!

— Have an issue? [Prepare a solution with TON Docs Wizard](https://t.me/ton_docs_bot).  
— Have an idea? [Submit a Feature Request](https://github.com/ton-community/ton-docs/issues/new/choose).  
— Want to contribute? [Setup your environment](https://github.com/ton-community/ton-docs#set-up-your-environment-%EF%B8%8F).

Contributing best practices:  [docs/contribute](/v3/contribute)

---

## Set up your Environment ☁️

If you are changing the sidebar or adding media-files, please check that your submission will not break production.

You can do this in two ways:

### Cloud (quick way)

Use Gitpod (a free, online VS code-like IDE) for contributing. It will launch a workspace with a single click:

[![Open in Gitpod](https://gitpod.io/button/open-in-gitpod.svg)](https://gitpod.io/#https://github.com/ton-community/ton-docs)

### Local (default way)

1. Download repository from GitHub with its submodules

    ```
    git clone --recursive https://github.com/ton-community/ton-docs.git 
    ```

2. Install last version [NodeJS LTS](https://nodejs.org/en/download/) to run local build
3. Open Terminal in project directory
4. Install dependencies with command:

    ```
    npm install
    ```
5. Run project with command:

    ```
    npm run start
    ```
6. Build with multiple locales and run it locally

    ```
    npm run build
    npm run serve
    ```

This command starts a local development server and opens up a browser window. Most changes are reflected live without having to restart the server.

## Install Recursive Module

If you cloned the repository from GitHub without step 1, you will need to install the submodules to enable local execution.
  ```
  git submodule update --init --recursive
  ```

## Contributors Wall
<a href="https://github.com/ton-community/ton-docs/graphs/contributors">
  <img src="https://contrib.rocks/image?repo=ton-community/ton-docs&max=204" />
</a>

<p align="right" style="font-size: 14px; color: #555; margin-top: 20px;">
  <a href="#readme-top" style="text-decoration: none; color: blue; font-weight: bold;">
    ↑ Back to Top ↑
  </a>
</p>
## License

[GPL-3.0](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/gpl-3.0/)

Commit message:

Proofread and rework localization documentation (#973)
* how-it-works.md update

Rework headers and proofread

* Update how-it-works.md

Refactor in active voice

* Update how-it-works.md

Proofread

* Update how-to-contribute.md

Proofread and refactor to active voice

* Update how-to-contribute.md

Proofread

* Update overview.md

Proofread

* Update translation-style-guide.md

Proofread

* Update translation-style-guide.md

Proofread

* Update translation-style-guide.md

Proofread

* Update translation-style-guide.md

Proofread and active voice

* Update how-to-contribute.md

Link formating

* Update overview.md

Link formating

* short_naming

* update_readme

README.md, after:

<img align="left" width="300px" src="static\img\readme\about.png">

## TON documentation 📚

This is the official repository for The Open Network documentation.

Latest documentation release: [docs.ton.org](https://docs.ton.org)

---

<img align="right" width="300px" src="static\img\readme\contribute.png">

## Join TON Docs Club 💎

TON is an actively growing ecosystem, and every day many devs contribute to its development. 

You can participate in TON by helping organize knowledge, making Pull Requests and creating tutorials to help other developers. 
Feedback, lectures, technical articles, tutorials, and examples. All this can help the developers community grow even faster!

Join TON Docs Club chat in Telegram to join contributors party:
* https://t.me/+c-0fVO4XHQsyOWM8

---

<img align="left" width="300px" src="static\img\readme\how.png">

## How to Contribute? 🦄

— Have an issue? [Prepare a solution with TON Docs Wizard](https://t.me/ton_docs_bot).  
— Have an idea? [Submit a Feature Request](https://github.com/ton-community/ton-docs/issues/new/choose).  
— Want to contribute? [How to contribute](https://docs.ton.org/v3/contribute).
— Want to translate? [Localization](https://docs.ton.org/v3/contribute/localization-program/how-to-contribute)



---

## Set up your environment ☁️

If you're changing the sidebar or adding media-files, links, please make sure that your submission won't break production.

You can do this in two ways:

### Cloud

Use Gitpod for contributing. It'll launch a workspace with a single click:

[![Open in Gitpod](https://gitpod.io/button/open-in-gitpod.svg)](https://gitpod.io/#https://github.com/ton-community/ton-docs)

### Local

1. Download repository from GitHub with its submodules

    ```
    git clone --recursive https://github.com/ton-community/ton-docs.git 
    ```

2. Install last version [NodeJS LTS](https://nodejs.org/en/download/) to run local build
3. Open Terminal in project directory
4. Install dependencies with command:

    ```
    npm install
    ```
5. Run project with command:

    ```
    npm run start
    ```
6. Build with multiple locales and run it locally

    ```
    npm run build
    npm run serve
    ```

This command starts a local development server and opens up a browser window. Most changes are reflected live without having to restart the server.

## Install recursive module

If you cloned the repository from GitHub without step 1, you'll need to install the submodules to enable local execution.
  ```
  git submodule update --init --recursive
  ```

## Contributors wall
<a href="https://github.com/ton-community/ton-docs/graphs/contributors">
  <img src="https://contrib.rocks/image?repo=ton-community/ton-docs&max=204" />
</a>

<p align="right" style="font-size: 14px; color: #555; margin-top: 20px;">
  <a href="#readme-top" style="text-decoration: none; color: blue; font-weight: bold;">
    ↑ Back to Top ↑
  </a>
</p>
## License

[GPL-3.0](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/gpl-3.0/)
