docs/develop/dapps/apis/sdk.mdx, before:

# SDKs

Instant navigate on preferred language with right sidebar.

## Overview

There are different ways to connect to blockchain:
1. RPC data provider or other API: in most cases, you have to *rely* on its stability and security.
2. ADNL connection: you're connecting to a [liteserver](/participate/run-nodes/liteserver). They might be inaccessible, but with a certain level of validation (implemented in the library), cannot lie.
3. Tonlib binary: you're connecting to liteserver as well, so all benefits and downsides apply, but your application also contains a dynamic-loading library compiled outside.
4. Offchain-only. Such SDKs allow to create and serialize cells, which you can then send to APIs.


### TypeScript / JavaScript

| Library |	Blockchain connection |	Description |
|---------|------------------|--------------|
|[ton](https://github.com/ton-org/ton)|via RPC ([Orbs](https://www.orbs.com/ton-access/) / [Toncenter](https://toncenter.com/api/v2/) / etc)|Convenient client library with wallet wrappers for development dApps on TON Blockchain.|
|[tonweb](https://github.com/toncenter/tonweb)|via RPC ([Orbs](https://www.orbs.com/ton-access/) / [Toncenter](https://toncenter.com/api/v2/) / etc)|Old-style TON JS SDK, with minimal external dependencies, extensively tested in production.|
|[tonkite/adnl](https://github.com/tonkite/adnl)|[ADNL](/develop/network/adnl-tcp) natively / via WebSocket| ADNL TypeScript implementation. |
|[tonutils](https://github.com/thekiba/tonutils)|Native [ADNL](/develop/network/adnl-tcp)| TypeScript-based interface for building and interacting with applications in TON Ecosystem. Due to native ADNL dependency, cannot be used for blockchain interaction in browser.|
|[foton](https://foton.sh/)|via RPC ([Orbs](https://www.orbs.com/ton-access/) / [Toncenter](https://toncenter.com/api/v2/) / etc)|TypeScript toolkit for interacting with TON wallets and blockchain as a whole. The library wraps existing solutions (Blueprint and TON Connect) into one comfortable API.|

### Java
| Library |	Blockchain connection |	Description |
|---------|------------------|--------------|
| [ton4j](https://github.com/neodix42/ton4j) | Tonlib binary | Java SDK for The Open Network (TON) |


### Python

<!-- tonsdk dropped due to invalid cells serialization, it is deprecated now -->

| Library |	Blockchain connection |	Description |
|---------|------------------|--------------|
|[pytoniq](https://github.com/yungwine/pytoniq) |Native ADNL| Python SDK with native LiteClient and other ADNL-based protocols implementations. |
|[pytoniq-core](https://github.com/yungwine/pytoniq-core) |	*offchain-only* | Python powerful transport-free SDK |
|[pytonlib](https://github.com/toncenter/pytonlib)|Tonlib binary| This is standalone Python library based on libtonlibjson, brought as a binary dependency from TON monorepo. |
|[mytonlib](https://github.com/igroman787/mytonlib)|Native ADNL| Native Python SDK library for working with The Open Network |
|[TonTools](https://github.com/yungwine/TonTools)|via RPC ([Orbs](https://www.orbs.com/ton-access/) / [Toncenter](https://toncenter.com/api/v2/) / etc)|TonTools is a high-level OOP library for Python, which can be used to interact with TON Blockchain.|
|[tonpy](https://github.com/disintar/tonpy)|Native ADNL| Python package that provides data structures and API to interact with TON blockchain. |
|[tvm_valuetypes](https://github.com/toncenter/tvm_valuetypes)|*offchain-only*| library is collection of utilits for handling TVM types. |
|[pytvm](https://github.com/yungwine/pytvm) | *offchain* | Python TVM emulator using bindings to C++ standard emulator |


### C#

| Library |	Blockchain connection |	Description |
|---------|------------------|--------------|
|[TonSdk.NET](https://github.com/continuation-team/TonSdk.NET)|Native ADNL or RPC|Native C# SDK for The Open Network. |
|[justdmitry/TonLib.NET](https://github.com/justdmitry/TonLib.NET) |Tonlib binary|.NET SDK for The Open Network, connecting via libtonlibjson brought as a binary dependency from TON monorepo.|


### Rust

| Library |	Blockchain connection |	Description |
|---------|------------------|--------------|
|[tonlib-rs](https://github.com/ston-fi/tonlib-rs)|Tonlib binary| Rust SDK for The Open Network, bringing binary dependency from TON monorepo.|
|[getgems-io/ton-grpc](https://github.com/getgems-io/ton-grpc)|Tonlib binary| Rust bindings for tonlibjson (thus, depending on binary from TON monorepo) and services built on top of it |


### Go

| Library |	Blockchain connection |	Description |
|---------|------------------|--------------|
|[tonutils-go](https://github.com/xssnick/tonutils-go)|Native ADNL|Golang library for interacting with TON blockchain|
|[tongo](https://github.com/tonkeeper/tongo)|Native ADNL|Go implementation of libraries for TON blockchain|
|[tonlib-go](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/tonlib-go)|Tonlib binary|Official bindings for libtonlibjson|


### SDKs for other languages

| Library |	Language |	Blockchain connection |	Description |
|---------|----------|-------|--------------|
|[ton-kotlin](https://github.com/ton-community/ton-kotlin)|Kotlin|Native ADNL |Kotlin/Multiplatform SDK for The Open Network.|
|[tonlib-java](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/tonlib-java)	| Java |	Tonlib bin	 | JVM wrapper for TonLib that can be used with Java/Scala/Kotlin/etc.|
|[ayrat555/ton](https://github.com/ayrat555/ton) | Elixir | *offchain-only* | TON SDK for Elixir.|
|[C++ Tonlib](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/tree/master/example/cpp)|C++|Tonlib binary|Official examples on smart contract interaction in TON monorepo|.
|[Java Tonlib](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/tonlib-java)|Java|Tonlib binary|Official examples on smart contract interaction in TON monorepo.|
|[labraburn/SwiftyTON](https://github.com/labraburn/SwiftyTON)|Swift|Tonlib binary|Native Swift wrapper for tonlib with async/await.|
|[tonlib-xcframework](https://github.com/labraburn/tonlib-xcframework)|Swift|Tonlib binary|Tonlib build helper for iOS, all architectures.|
|[labraburn/node-tonlib](https://github.com/labraburn/node-tonlib)|NodeJS|Tonlib binary|C++ addon for NodeJS to work with tonlibjson.|
|[olifanton/ton](https://github.com/olifanton/ton)|PHP|via RPC ([Orbs](https://www.orbs.com/ton-access/) / [Toncenter](https://toncenter.com/api/v2/) / etc)|PHP SDK with a set of standard primitives and contracts.|

Commit message:

Added tonutils SDK to the Python SDKs section (#740)

docs/develop/dapps/apis/sdk.mdx, after:

# SDKs

Instant navigate on preferred language with right sidebar.

## Overview

There are different ways to connect to blockchain:
1. RPC data provider or other API: in most cases, you have to *rely* on its stability and security.
2. ADNL connection: you're connecting to a [liteserver](/participate/run-nodes/liteserver). They might be inaccessible, but with a certain level of validation (implemented in the library), cannot lie.
3. Tonlib binary: you're connecting to liteserver as well, so all benefits and downsides apply, but your application also contains a dynamic-loading library compiled outside.
4. Offchain-only. Such SDKs allow to create and serialize cells, which you can then send to APIs.


### TypeScript / JavaScript

| Library |	Blockchain connection |	Description |
|---------|------------------|--------------|
|[ton](https://github.com/ton-org/ton)|via RPC ([Orbs](https://www.orbs.com/ton-access/) / [Toncenter](https://toncenter.com/api/v2/) / etc)|Convenient client library with wallet wrappers for development dApps on TON Blockchain.|
|[tonweb](https://github.com/toncenter/tonweb)|via RPC ([Orbs](https://www.orbs.com/ton-access/) / [Toncenter](https://toncenter.com/api/v2/) / etc)|Old-style TON JS SDK, with minimal external dependencies, extensively tested in production.|
|[tonkite/adnl](https://github.com/tonkite/adnl)|[ADNL](/develop/network/adnl-tcp) natively / via WebSocket| ADNL TypeScript implementation. |
|[tonutils](https://github.com/thekiba/tonutils)|Native [ADNL](/develop/network/adnl-tcp)| TypeScript-based interface for building and interacting with applications in TON Ecosystem. Due to native ADNL dependency, cannot be used for blockchain interaction in browser.|
|[foton](https://foton.sh/)|via RPC ([Orbs](https://www.orbs.com/ton-access/) / [Toncenter](https://toncenter.com/api/v2/) / etc)|TypeScript toolkit for interacting with TON wallets and blockchain as a whole. The library wraps existing solutions (Blueprint and TON Connect) into one comfortable API.|

### Java
| Library |	Blockchain connection |	Description |
|---------|------------------|--------------|
| [ton4j](https://github.com/neodix42/ton4j) | Tonlib binary | Java SDK for The Open Network (TON) |


### Python

<!-- tonsdk dropped due to invalid cells serialization, it is deprecated now -->

| Library |	Blockchain connection |	Description |
|---------|------------------|--------------|
|[pytoniq](https://github.com/yungwine/pytoniq) |Native ADNL| Python SDK with native LiteClient and other ADNL-based protocols implementations. |
|[pytoniq-core](https://github.com/yungwine/pytoniq-core) |	*offchain-only* | Python powerful transport-free SDK |
|[tonutils](https://github.com/nessshon/tonutils) |	via RPC ([TONAPI](https://tonapi.io/api-v2) / [Toncenter](https://toncenter.com/api/v3/)) / Native ADNL ([pytoniq](https://github.com/yungwine/pytoniq))| Tonutils is a high-level object-oriented library for Python designed to facilitate interactions with the TON blockchain |
|[pytonlib](https://github.com/toncenter/pytonlib)|Tonlib binary| This is standalone Python library based on libtonlibjson, brought as a binary dependency from TON monorepo. |
|[mytonlib](https://github.com/igroman787/mytonlib)|Native ADNL| Native Python SDK library for working with The Open Network |
|[TonTools](https://github.com/yungwine/TonTools)|via RPC ([Orbs](https://www.orbs.com/ton-access/) / [Toncenter](https://toncenter.com/api/v2/) / etc)|TonTools is a high-level OOP library for Python, which can be used to interact with TON Blockchain.|
|[tonpy](https://github.com/disintar/tonpy)|Native ADNL| Python package that provides data structures and API to interact with TON blockchain. |
|[tvm_valuetypes](https://github.com/toncenter/tvm_valuetypes)|*offchain-only*| library is collection of utilits for handling TVM types. |
|[pytvm](https://github.com/yungwine/pytvm) | *offchain* | Python TVM emulator using bindings to C++ standard emulator |


### C#

| Library |	Blockchain connection |	Description |
|---------|------------------|--------------|
|[TonSdk.NET](https://github.com/continuation-team/TonSdk.NET)|Native ADNL or RPC|Native C# SDK for The Open Network. |
|[justdmitry/TonLib.NET](https://github.com/justdmitry/TonLib.NET) |Tonlib binary|.NET SDK for The Open Network, connecting via libtonlibjson brought as a binary dependency from TON monorepo.|


### Rust

| Library |	Blockchain connection |	Description |
|---------|------------------|--------------|
|[tonlib-rs](https://github.com/ston-fi/tonlib-rs)|Tonlib binary| Rust SDK for The Open Network, bringing binary dependency from TON monorepo.|
|[getgems-io/ton-grpc](https://github.com/getgems-io/ton-grpc)|Tonlib binary| Rust bindings for tonlibjson (thus, depending on binary from TON monorepo) and services built on top of it |


### Go

| Library |	Blockchain connection |	Description |
|---------|------------------|--------------|
|[tonutils-go](https://github.com/xssnick/tonutils-go)|Native ADNL|Golang library for interacting with TON blockchain|
|[tongo](https://github.com/tonkeeper/tongo)|Native ADNL|Go implementation of libraries for TON blockchain|
|[tonlib-go](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/tonlib-go)|Tonlib binary|Official bindings for libtonlibjson|


### SDKs for other languages

| Library |	Language |	Blockchain connection |	Description |
|---------|----------|-------|--------------|
|[ton-kotlin](https://github.com/ton-community/ton-kotlin)|Kotlin|Native ADNL |Kotlin/Multiplatform SDK for The Open Network.|
|[tonlib-java](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/tonlib-java)	| Java |	Tonlib bin	 | JVM wrapper for TonLib that can be used with Java/Scala/Kotlin/etc.|
|[ayrat555/ton](https://github.com/ayrat555/ton) | Elixir | *offchain-only* | TON SDK for Elixir.|
|[C++ Tonlib](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/tree/master/example/cpp)|C++|Tonlib binary|Official examples on smart contract interaction in TON monorepo|.
|[Java Tonlib](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/tonlib-java)|Java|Tonlib binary|Official examples on smart contract interaction in TON monorepo.|
|[labraburn/SwiftyTON](https://github.com/labraburn/SwiftyTON)|Swift|Tonlib binary|Native Swift wrapper for tonlib with async/await.|
|[tonlib-xcframework](https://github.com/labraburn/tonlib-xcframework)|Swift|Tonlib binary|Tonlib build helper for iOS, all architectures.|
|[labraburn/node-tonlib](https://github.com/labraburn/node-tonlib)|NodeJS|Tonlib binary|C++ addon for NodeJS to work with tonlibjson.|
|[olifanton/ton](https://github.com/olifanton/ton)|PHP|via RPC ([Orbs](https://www.orbs.com/ton-access/) / [Toncenter](https://toncenter.com/api/v2/) / etc)|PHP SDK with a set of standard primitives and contracts.|
