docs/contribute/hacktoberfest/as-maintainer.md, before:

# Participate as Maintainer

Hacktoberfest event is the best time of year to receive support from the community!

If your repository is related to the TON ecosystem, you will have attention from many contributors. Let's help them dive properly into your project!

## Prepare to party

To handle contributors in a right way you need to have a repository in a good standing.

Prepare your project for contributions by following these best practices:


1. Add the “hacktoberfest” topic to your repository to **OPT-IN TO HACKTOBERFEST** and indicate you’re looking for contributions.
2. Apply the “hacktoberfest” label to issues you want contributors to help with in your GitHub or GitLab project.
3. Please, read and use [essential tips for new open-source maintainers](https://society.ton.org/essential-tips-for-new-open-source-maintainers) by TON Society.
4. Be ready to review pull/merge requests, accepting those that are valid by merging them, leaving an overall approving review, or by adding the “hacktoberfest-accepted” label.
5. Reject any spammy requests you receive by labeling them as “spam”, and any other invalid contributions by closing them or labeling them as “invalid.”

After that feel free to add your repository to list.

## Rewards for Maintainers

As maintainer of repository in TON Ecosystem, you'll be able to receive 2 types of rewards:

1. [Hacktoberfest Reward Kit](https://hacktoberfest.com/participation/#maintainers) (_see REWARD FOR MAINTAINERS_)
2. [Limited Hack-TON-berfest NFT](/contribute/hacktoberfest/#what-the-rewards) (_please, register wallet address in [@toncontests_bot](https://t.me/toncontests_bot)_)

## How to be listed and participate?

To participate in Hack-TON-berfest use this link:

<span className="DocsMarkdown--button-group-content">
  <a href="https://airtable.com/shrgXIgZdBKKX64NL"
     className="Button Button-is-docs-primary">
    Add repository to the List
  </a>
</span>

Commit message:

added link to example repository

docs/contribute/hacktoberfest/as-maintainer.md, after:

# Participate as Maintainer

Hacktoberfest event is the best time of year to receive support from the community!

If your repository is related to the TON ecosystem, you will have attention from many contributors. Let's help them dive properly into your project!

## Prepare to party

To handle contributors in a right way you need to have a repository in a good standing.

Prepare your project for contributions by following these best practices:

1. Add the “hacktoberfest” topic to your repository to **OPT-IN TO HACKTOBERFEST** and indicate you’re looking for contributions.
2. Apply the “hacktoberfest” label to issues you want contributors to help with in your GitHub or GitLab project.
3. Please, read and use [essential tips for new open-source maintainers](https://society.ton.org/essential-tips-for-new-open-source-maintainers) by TON Society.
4. Be ready to review pull/merge requests, accepting those that are valid by merging them, leaving an overall approving review, or by adding the “hacktoberfest-accepted” label.
5. Reject any spammy requests you receive by labeling them as “spam”, and any other invalid contributions by closing them or labeling them as “invalid.”

Here is an example of ready repository: [ton-community/ton-compiler](https://github.com/ton-community/ton-compiler)

After that feel free to add your repository to list.

## Rewards for Maintainers

As maintainer of repository in TON Ecosystem, you'll be able to receive 2 types of rewards:

1. [Hacktoberfest Reward Kit](https://hacktoberfest.com/participation/#maintainers) (_see REWARD FOR MAINTAINERS_)
2. [Limited Hack-TON-berfest NFT](/contribute/hacktoberfest/#what-the-rewards) (_please, register wallet address in [@toncontests_bot](https://t.me/toncontests_bot)_)

## How to be listed and participate?

To participate in Hack-TON-berfest use this link:

<span className="DocsMarkdown--button-group-content">
  <a href="https://airtable.com/shrgXIgZdBKKX64NL"
     className="Button Button-is-docs-primary">
    Add repository to the List
  </a>
</span>
