docs/v3/documentation/tvm/specification/runvm.mdx, before:

import Feedback from '@site/src/components/Feedback';


# RUNVM specification

Currently, TVM does not provide a mechanism for executing external untrusted code within a secure sandbox environment. In other words, any external code invoked has unrestricted access and can permanently modify the contract's code and data or trigger actions such as transferring all funds.

The `RUNVM` instruction creates an isolated VM instance, allowing code execution while safely retrieving data such as stack state, registers, and gas consumption. This ensures the caller's state remains unaffected. This allows arbitrary code to run safely, which is helpful for [v4-style plugins](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/contracts-specs/wallet-contracts#wallet-v4), Tact's `init`-style subcontract calculations, and similar use cases.

| Fift syntax | Stack | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|:-|:-|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `flags RUNVM` | _`x_1 ... x_n n code [r] [c4] [c7] [g_l] [g_m] - x'_1 ... x'_m exitcode [data'] [c4'] [c5] [g_c]`_ | Executes a child VM with the given `code` and stack values `x_1 ... x_n`. Returns the modified stack `x'_1 ... x'_m` along with an exit code. <br/> Flags determine other arguments and return values. See details below.|
| `RUNVMX` | _`x_1 ... x_n n code [r] [c4] [c7] [g_l] [g_m] flags - x'_1 ... x'_m exitcode [data'] [c4'] [c5] [g_c]`_ | It is the same as `RUNVM` but retrieves flags from the stack.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |


Flags operate similarly to `RUNVMX` in Fift:

- `+1`: sets `c3` to code.
- `+2`: pushes an implicit `0` before executing the code.
- `+4`: takes persistent data `c4` from the stack and returns its final value.
- `+8`: takes the gas limit `g_l` from the stack and returns the consumed gas `g_c`.
- `+16`: takes `c7` (smart contract context) from the stack.
- `+32`: returns the final value of `c5` (actions).
- `+64`: pops the hard gas limit `g_m` enabled by `ACCEPT` from the stack.
- `+128`: enables "isolated gas consumption", meaning the child VM maintains a separate set of visited cells and a `chksgn` counter.
- `+256`: pops an integer `r` and ensures exactly `r` values are returned from the top of the stack:
  - If `RUNVM` call succeeds and `r` is set, it returns `r` elements. If `r` is not set, it returns all available elements.
  - If `RUNVM` is successful but lacks elements on the stack, meaning the stack depth is less than `r`, it is treated as an exception in the child VM. The `exit_code` is set to `-3`, and `exit_arg` is set to `0`, so `0` is returned as the only stack element.
  - If `RUNVM` fails with an exception, only one element is returned, `exit_arg`, which should not be confused with `exit_code`.
  - In the case of running out of gas, `exit_code` is set to `-14`, and `exit_arg` contains the amount of gas.

Gas cost:
- 66 gas;
- 1 gas for each stack element passed to the child VM (the first 32 elements are free);
- 1 gas for each stack element returned from the child VM (the first 32 elements are free).

## See also

- [TVM instructions](/v3/documentation/tvm/instructions)

<Feedback />

Commit message:

Add note on RUNVM +2 flag behavior (#1190)

docs/v3/documentation/tvm/specification/runvm.mdx, after:

import Feedback from '@site/src/components/Feedback';


# RUNVM specification

Currently, TVM does not provide a mechanism for executing external untrusted code within a secure sandbox environment. In other words, any external code invoked has unrestricted access and can permanently modify the contract's code and data or trigger actions such as transferring all funds.

The `RUNVM` instruction creates an isolated VM instance, allowing code execution while safely retrieving data such as stack state, registers, and gas consumption. This ensures the caller's state remains unaffected. This allows arbitrary code to run safely, which is helpful for [v4-style plugins](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/contracts-specs/wallet-contracts#wallet-v4), Tact's `init`-style subcontract calculations, and similar use cases.

| Fift syntax | Stack | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|:-|:-|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `flags RUNVM` | _`x_1 ... x_n n code [r] [c4] [c7] [g_l] [g_m] - x'_1 ... x'_m exitcode [data'] [c4'] [c5] [g_c]`_ | Executes a child VM with the given `code` and stack values `x_1 ... x_n`. Returns the modified stack `x'_1 ... x'_m` along with an exit code. <br/> Flags determine other arguments and return values. See details below.|
| `RUNVMX` | _`x_1 ... x_n n code [r] [c4] [c7] [g_l] [g_m] flags - x'_1 ... x'_m exitcode [data'] [c4'] [c5] [g_c]`_ | It is the same as `RUNVM` but retrieves flags from the stack.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |


Flags operate similarly to `RUNVMX` in Fift:

- `+1`: sets `c3` to code.
- `+2`: pushes an implicit `0` before executing the code. Note, it only works with +1 flag set
- `+4`: takes persistent data `c4` from the stack and returns its final value.
- `+8`: takes the gas limit `g_l` from the stack and returns the consumed gas `g_c`.
- `+16`: takes `c7` (smart contract context) from the stack.
- `+32`: returns the final value of `c5` (actions).
- `+64`: pops the hard gas limit `g_m` enabled by `ACCEPT` from the stack.
- `+128`: enables "isolated gas consumption", meaning the child VM maintains a separate set of visited cells and a `chksgn` counter.
- `+256`: pops an integer `r` and ensures exactly `r` values are returned from the top of the stack:
  - If `RUNVM` call succeeds and `r` is set, it returns `r` elements. If `r` is not set, it returns all available elements.
  - If `RUNVM` is successful but lacks elements on the stack, meaning the stack depth is less than `r`, it is treated as an exception in the child VM. The `exit_code` is set to `-3`, and `exit_arg` is set to `0`, so `0` is returned as the only stack element.
  - If `RUNVM` fails with an exception, only one element is returned, `exit_arg`, which should not be confused with `exit_code`.
  - In the case of running out of gas, `exit_code` is set to `-14`, and `exit_arg` contains the amount of gas.

Gas cost:
- 66 gas;
- 1 gas for each stack element passed to the child VM (the first 32 elements are free);
- 1 gas for each stack element returned from the child VM (the first 32 elements are free).

## See also

- [TVM instructions](/v3/documentation/tvm/instructions)

<Feedback />
