docs/develop/dapps/defi/tokens.mdx, before:

import Button from '@site/src/components/button'

# Tokens (FT, NFT)

[Distributed TON tokens overview](https://telegra.ph/Scalable-DeFi-in-TON-03-30)

## TON Course: Jettons & NFTs

The [TON Blockchain Course](https://stepik.org/course/176754/) is a comprehensive guide to TON Blockchain development.

Module 7 completely covers __NFT & Jettons__ development.

<Button href="https://stepik.org/course/176754/" colorType={'primary'} sizeType={'sm'}>Check TON Blockchain Course</Button>

## Tutorials
* [Web3 Game Tutorial](/develop/dapps/tutorials/building-web3-game) - Learn how to build a Web3 game with TON Blockchain.
* [Mint your first Jetton](/develop/dapps/tutorials/jetton-minter/) — Learn how to deploy and customize your first Jetton
* [[YouTube] TON Keeper founders Oleg Andreev and Oleg Illarionov on TON jettons](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oEO29KmOpv4)

### TON Speed Run

Check out the [TON Speed Run](https://tonspeedrun.com/) series, which includes NFT and Jetton development:

  - [🚩 Challenge 1: Simple NFT Deploy](https://github.com/romanovichim/TONQuest1)
  - [🚩 Challenge 2: Chatbot Contract](https://github.com/romanovichim/TONQuest2)
  - [🚩 Challenge 3: Jetton Vending Machine](https://github.com/romanovichim/TONQuest3)
  - [🚩 Challenge 4: Lottery/Raffle](https://github.com/romanovichim/TONQuest4)
  - [🚩 Challenge 5: Create UI to interact with the contract in 5 minutes](https://github.com/romanovichim/TONQuest5)
  - [🚩 Challenge 6: Analyzing NFT sales on the Getgems marketplace](https://github.com/romanovichim/TONQuest6)


## Jettons (Fungible Tokens)

### Guides
* [TON Jetton processing](/develop/dapps/asset-processing/jettons.md)
* [TON Metadata Parsing](/develop/dapps/asset-processing/metadata.md)

### Standards

* [Jettons standard](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md)

### Smart contracts

* [Smart contracts implementation (FunC)](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/token-contract/)

### Jetton Deployer

Jettons are custom fungible tokens on TON Blockchain. You can create your own token on TON Blockchain using the Jetton Deployer example below:

* **[TON Minter](https://minter.ton.org/)** — open-source Jetton Deployer dApp
* [Jetton Deployer — contracts](https://github.com/ton-defi-org/jetton-deployer-contracts) (FunC, TL-B)
* [Jetton Deployer — WebClient](https://github.com/ton-defi-org/jetton-deployer-webclient) (React, TypeScript)

### Tools to work with Jettons

* [NFT Jetton Sale Contract](https://github.com/dvlkv/nft-jetton-sale-smc) - NFT Sale contract with jetton support
* [Scaleton](http://scaleton.io)—see your custom token balance
* [@tegro/ton3-client](https://github.com/TegroTON/ton3-client#jettons-example)—SDK to query information about Jettons

## NFT

### Standards

* [NFT standard](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0062-nft-standard.md)
* [SBT (Soulbound NFT) standard](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0085-sbt-standard.md)
* [NFTRoyalty standard extension](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0066-nft-royalty-standard.md)


### Smart Contracts

* [Smart contracts implementation (FunC)](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/token-contract/)
* [Getgems NFT, sale, auctions smart contracts (FunC)](https://github.com/getgems-io/nft-contracts)

### NFT minters

* [NFT Deployer](https://github.com/tondiamonds/ton-nft-deployer) by TON Diamonds (TypeScript, no comments)
* [NFT Minter example](https://github.com/ton-foundation/token-contract/tree/main/nft/web-example) (JavaScript, with comments)
* [NFT Minter using React](https://github.com/tonbuilders/tonbuilders-minter) (React, no comments)
* [NFT Deployer](https://github.com/anomaly-guard/nft-deployer) (Python, with comments)
* [NFT Minter using Golang](https://github.com/xssnick/tonutils-go#nft) (Golang library, with comments and full examples)

### Tools to work with NFTs

* [LiberMall/tnt](https://github.com/LiberMall/tnt)—TNT is an all-in-one command-line tool to query, edit, and mint new Non-Fungible Tokens on The Open Network.

Commit message:

Updates in SDK and cookbook pages, with corresponding sidebar rearrangements

docs/develop/dapps/defi/tokens.mdx, after:

import Button from '@site/src/components/button'

# Tokens (FT, NFT)

[Distributed TON tokens overview](https://telegra.ph/Scalable-DeFi-in-TON-03-30)

> TON-powered tokens and NFTs do not have a single center and do not create bottlenecks.
> 
> Each NFT in a given collection is a separate smart contract. The token balance for each user is stored in a separate user wallet.
> 
> Smart contracts interact with one another directly, spreading the load on the whole network.
> 
> With the growth in user and transaction count, the load will still be even, allowing the network to scale.

## TON Course: Jettons & NFTs

The [TON Blockchain Course](https://stepik.org/course/176754/) is a comprehensive guide to TON Blockchain development.

Module 7 completely covers __NFT & Jettons__ development.

<Button href="https://stepik.org/course/176754/" colorType={'primary'} sizeType={'sm'}>Check TON Blockchain Course</Button>

## Tutorials
* [Web3 Game Tutorial](/develop/dapps/tutorials/building-web3-game) - Learn how to build a Web3 game with TON Blockchain.
* [Mint your first Jetton](/develop/dapps/tutorials/jetton-minter/) — Learn how to deploy and customize your first Jetton
* [[YouTube] TON Keeper founders Oleg Andreev and Oleg Illarionov on TON jettons](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oEO29KmOpv4)

### TON Speed Run

Check out the [TON Speed Run](https://tonspeedrun.com/) series, which includes NFT and Jetton development:

  - [🚩 Challenge 1: Simple NFT Deploy](https://github.com/romanovichim/TONQuest1)
  - [🚩 Challenge 2: Chatbot Contract](https://github.com/romanovichim/TONQuest2)
  - [🚩 Challenge 3: Jetton Vending Machine](https://github.com/romanovichim/TONQuest3)
  - [🚩 Challenge 4: Lottery/Raffle](https://github.com/romanovichim/TONQuest4)
  - [🚩 Challenge 5: Create UI to interact with the contract in 5 minutes](https://github.com/romanovichim/TONQuest5)
  - [🚩 Challenge 6: Analyzing NFT sales on the Getgems marketplace](https://github.com/romanovichim/TONQuest6)


## Jettons (Fungible Tokens)

### Guides
* [TON Jetton processing](/develop/dapps/asset-processing/jettons.md)
* [TON Metadata Parsing](/develop/dapps/asset-processing/metadata.md)

### Standards

* [Jettons standard](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md)

### Smart contracts

* [Smart contracts implementation (FunC)](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/token-contract/)

### Jetton Deployer

Jettons are custom fungible tokens on TON Blockchain. You can create your own token on TON Blockchain using the Jetton Deployer example below:

* **[TON Minter](https://minter.ton.org/)** — open-source Jetton Deployer dApp
* [Jetton Deployer — contracts](https://github.com/ton-defi-org/jetton-deployer-contracts) (FunC, TL-B)
* [Jetton Deployer — WebClient](https://github.com/ton-defi-org/jetton-deployer-webclient) (React, TypeScript)

### Tools to work with Jettons

* [NFT Jetton Sale Contract](https://github.com/dvlkv/nft-jetton-sale-smc) - NFT Sale contract with jetton support
* [Scaleton](http://scaleton.io)—see your custom token balance
* [@tegro/ton3-client](https://github.com/TegroTON/ton3-client#jettons-example)—SDK to query information about Jettons

## NFT

### Standards

* [NFT standard](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0062-nft-standard.md)
* [SBT (Soulbound NFT) standard](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0085-sbt-standard.md)
* [NFTRoyalty standard extension](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0066-nft-royalty-standard.md)


### Smart Contracts

* [Smart contracts implementation (FunC)](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/token-contract/)
* [Getgems NFT, sale, auctions smart contracts (FunC)](https://github.com/getgems-io/nft-contracts)

### NFT minters

* [NFT Deployer](https://github.com/tondiamonds/ton-nft-deployer) by TON Diamonds (TypeScript, no comments)
* [NFT Minter example](https://github.com/ton-foundation/token-contract/tree/main/nft/web-example) (JavaScript, with comments)
* [NFT Minter using React](https://github.com/tonbuilders/tonbuilders-minter) (React, no comments)
* [NFT Deployer](https://github.com/anomaly-guard/nft-deployer) (Python, with comments)
* [NFT Minter using Golang](https://github.com/xssnick/tonutils-go#nft) (Golang library, with comments and full examples)

### Tools to work with NFTs

* [LiberMall/tnt](https://github.com/LiberMall/tnt)—TNT is an all-in-one command-line tool to query, edit, and mint new Non-Fungible Tokens on The Open Network.
