docs/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/message-management/message-modes-cookbook.mdx, before:

# Message Modes Cookbook

Understanding the different modes and flags available for sending messages is important to ensure that your smart contracts behave correctly.
While [message modes](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/message-management/sending-messages#message-modes) section provided detailed descriptions of these modes and flags, in this section we will illustrate their practical application with specific examples.

:::info IMPORTANT
You can check [this example](https://testnet.tonviewer.com/transaction/42ed45726e4fe994b7fd6dbf953a2ac24ecd77753858abeda9d6755c664a537a) as a real-world confirmation.
:::

#### Message value and account balance

Please check how [get_balance](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/func/docs/stdlib/#get_balance) works to understand transaction state better. Balance in

There are 2 ways to pay for blockchain action:

- From the [message value](/v3/documentation/data-formats/tlb/msg-tlb#commonmsginfo)
- From the [contract balance](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/blob/7151ff26279fef6dcfa1f47fc0c5b63677ae2458/crypto/block/block.tlb#L263C1-L265C20)

Typically it's charged from contract `balance`, but in specific cases it will use part of the message `value`.

#### Fees

Actual transaction fees will vary depending on blockchain configuration, code of the smart contract and other factors. When message is received, part of the contract `balance` will be consumed by [storage fees](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/transaction-fees/fees-low-level#storage-fee) and gas_fees if message `value` [is above certain amount](/v3/documentation/tvm/tvm-overview#compute-phase-skipped).

According to [transaction flow](/v3/documentation/tvm/tvm-overview#transactions-and-phases) there are 5 phases:

- Storage, consisting of [account storage](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/blob/7151ff26279fef6dcfa1f47fc0c5b63677ae2458/crypto/block/transaction.cpp#L651-L675) and [in_msg import](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/blob/7151ff26279fef6dcfa1f47fc0c5b63677ae2458/crypto/block/transaction.cpp#L783-L816)
- [Credit](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/blob/7151ff26279fef6dcfa1f47fc0c5b63677ae2458/crypto/block/transaction.cpp#L959-L981), where in_msg `value` is added to the `balance`
- Compute, where actual smart contract code is executed in TVM
- Action, where actions like `SENDRAWMSG` are performed
- Bounce, where everything about bouncing is handled

The order is: storage_fee -> import_fee -> gas_fee -> action_fee + fwd_fee

:::info IMPORTANT
The table is populated from [this example](https://tonviewer.com/transaction/b5e14a9c4a4e982fda42d6079c3f84fa48e76497a8f3fca872f9a3737f1f6262). You can check [**live calculator**](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/transaction-fees/fees#basic-fees-formula).
:::

| Fee in Explorer                                                                                   | Value       | How it's obtained               |
| :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | :---------- | :------------------------------ |
| Total fee                                                                                         | 0,001982134 | gas + storage + action + import |
| total_fwd_fees                                                                                    | 0,001       | fwd_fee + action_fee + ihr_fee  |
| gas_fees                                                                                          | 0,0011976   | compute phase, gas used         |
| storage_fees                                                                                      | 0,000000003 | storage phase, account only     |
| total_action_fees                                                                                 | 0,000133331 | action phase, cost per action   |
| import_fee (hidden)                                                                               | 0,0006512   | cost of import of ext_msg       |
| [fwd_fee](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/transaction-fees/fees-low-level#formula-1) (each msg) | 0,000266669 | cost of fwd of in_msg           |
| [ihr_fee](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/transaction-fees/fees-low-level#ihr) (each msg)       | 0.0006      | cost of ihr fwd of in_msg       |

:::info
The transaction fees used in these examples are hypothetical and are used for illustrative purposes only, any fees other than message forward are out of scope of this article.
:::

## 1. Send a regular message

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B**, [msg_fwd_fees](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/transaction-fees/fees-low-level#forward-fees) are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 0.096 TON, `fwd_fee` and `action_fee` deducted from `value`.

State after transaction: Account A has 0.9 TON, Account B has 1.096 TON

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/send_regular_message_1.svg)

| Mode and Flags        | Code                       |
| :-------------------- | :------------------------- |
| `mode` = 0, no `flag` | `send_raw_message(msg, 0)` |

## 2. Send a regular message, no bounce the message on error and ignore it

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B**, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 0.096 TON, `fwd_fee` and `action_fee` deducted from `value`.
In case of an error during transaction processing, the message will not bounce and will be ignored.

State after transaction: Account A has 0.9 TON, Account B has 1.096 TON

:::info tip
Funds included with an ignored message will still be [credited to the receiving address](https://testnet.tonviewer.com/transaction/8a388731812c80ab9b0ea9531108425488af5def854e4bd6f0ed47362b56d557).
If no errors the result is the same as [`mode = 0`](#1-send-a-regular-message).
:::

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/send_regular_message_2.svg)

| Mode and Flags         | Code                       |
| :--------------------- | :------------------------- |
| `mode` = 0, `flag` = 2 | `send_raw_message(msg, 2)` |

## 3. Send a regular message and bounce the message on action error

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B**, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 0.096 TON, `fwd_fee` and `action_fee` deducted from `value`.
In case of an error during [action phase](https://retracer.ton.org/?tx=e9dccba82badc0d742f14eff41c203280f380e87180b5314fcfd742856e598f7&testnet=true), the message will bounce and `total_fee` + `fwd_fee` will be deducted from `value`.

State after transaction with error: Account A has 1 - ([total_fee](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/transaction-fees/fees#basic-fees-formula) + `fwd_fee`) TON, Account B has 1 TON

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/send_regular_message_3_error.svg)

:::info tip
If no errors the result is the same as [`mode = 0`](#1-send-a-regular-message).
:::

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/send_regular_message_3_noerror.svg)

| Mode and Flags          | Code                        |
| :---------------------- | :-------------------------- |
| `mode` = 0, `flag` = 16 | `send_raw_message(msg, 16)` |

## 4. Send a regular message with separate fees

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B**, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 0.1 TON, `fwd_fee` and `action_fee` deducted from `balance`.

State after transaction: Account A has 0.896 TON, Account B has 1.1 TON

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/send_regular_message_4.svg)

| Mode and Flags         | Code                       |
| :--------------------- | :------------------------- |
| `mode` = 0, `flag` = 1 | `send_raw_message(msg, 1)` |

## 5. Send a regular message with separate fees and bounce the message on error

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B**, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 0.1 TON, `fwd_fee` and `action_fee` deducted from `balance`.
In case of an error [during action phase](https://retracer.ton.org/?tx=e9dccba82badc0d742f14eff41c203280f380e87180b5314fcfd742856e598f7&testnet=true), the message will bounce and `total_fee` + `fwd_fee` will be deducted from `value`.

State after transaction with error: Account A has 1 - ([total_fee](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/transaction-fees/fees#basic-fees-formula) + `fwd_fee`) TON, Account B has 1 TON

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/send_regular_message_5_error.svg)

:::info tip
If no errors the result is the same as [`mode = 1`](#4-send-a-regular-message-with-separate-fees).
:::

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/send_regular_message_5_noerror.svg)

| Mode and Flags                   | Code                        |
| :------------------------------- | :-------------------------- |
| `mode` = 0, `flag` = 1 + 16 = 17 | `send_raw_message(msg, 17)` |

## 6. Carry remaining value with new message

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON, Account C has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B** after that **B** sent 0.5 TON to **C** with `mode` = 64, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received `value` will be 0.6 TON, total_fee + `fwd_fee` deducted from `value`.

State after transaction: Account A has 0.896 TON, Account B has 0.5 TON, Account C has 1.6 - (total_fee + `fwd_fee`) TON

:::info
You might check [this example](https://retracer.ton.org/?tx=4340b5ecbd83227cc64e10b1ca7628352133cda1d608081fb2ed58d299f00936&testnet=true).
:::

:::warning
Please note that `SENDRAWMSG` doesn't update balance.

If you try to send multiple messages (i.e. mode 0 **and** mode 64) you'll get exit code 37.
:::

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/carry_remaining_value_6.svg)

| Mode and Flags         | Code                        |
| :--------------------- | :-------------------------- |
| `mode` = 64, no `flag` | `send_raw_message(msg, 64)` |

## 7. Carry remaining value with new message with separate fees

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON, Account C has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B** after that **B** sent 0.5 TON to **C** with `mode` = 65, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 0.6 TON, total_fee + `fwd_fee` deducted from `balance`.

State after transaction: Account A has 0.896 TON, Account B has 0.5 - (total_fee + `fwd_fee`) TON, Account C has 1.6 TON

:::info
You might check [this example](https://retracer.ton.org/?tx=5c2525feeb3b93db594b7b11f3250430f02dd8616595cf2b1583ebc7da79d15b&testnet=true)
:::

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/carry_remaining_value_7.svg)

| Mode and Flags          | Code                        |
| :---------------------- | :-------------------------- |
| `mode` = 64, `flag` = 1 | `send_raw_message(msg, 65)` |

## 8. Carry remaining value and bounce the message on error

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON, Account C has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B** after that **B** sent 0.5 TON to **C** with `mode` = 80, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 0.6 TON, total_fee + `fwd_fee` deducted from `value`.
In case of an error during action phase, the message will bounce and `total_fee` + `fwd_fee` will be deducted from `value`.

State after transaction with error: Account A has 1 - (total_fee + `fwd_fee`) TON, Account B has 1 TON, Account C has 1 TON

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/carry_remaining_value_8_error.svg)

:::info tip
If no errors the result is the same as [`mode = 64`](#6-carry-remaining-value-with-new-message). This mode is actually used a lot in TON for jetton transfers, you can [check it in C5 action list](https://retracer.ton.org/?tx=6489d60d9197c0be7ee64b0812139d82221e8f94c6e378c356acc10f9067310c) of the jetton wallet.
:::

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/carry_remaining_value_8_noerror.svg)

| Mode and Flags           | Code                        |
| :----------------------- | :-------------------------- |
| `mode` = 64, `flag` = 16 | `send_raw_message(msg, 80)` |

## 9. Carry remaining value with new message with separate fees and bounce the message on error

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON, Account C has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B** after that **B** sent 0.5 TON to **C** with `mode` = 80, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 0.6 TON, total_fee + `fwd_fee` deducted from `balance`.
In case of an error during action phase, the message will bounce and `total_fee` + `fwd_fee` will be deducted from `value`.

State after transaction with error: Account A has 1 - (total_fee + `fwd_fee`) TON, Account B has 1 TON, Account C has 1 TON

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/carry_remaining_value_9_error.svg)

:::info tip
If no errors the result is the same as [`mode = 65`](#7-carry-remaining-value-with-new-message-with-separate-fees).
:::

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/carry_remaining_value_9_noerror.svg)

| Mode and Flags               | Code                        |
| :--------------------------- | :-------------------------- |
| `mode` = 64, `flag` = 16 + 1 | `send_raw_message(msg, 81)` |

## 10. Send all received tokens together with the contract balance

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON, Account C has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B** after that **B** sent 0.5 TON to **C** with `mode` = 128, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 1.1 - total_fee TON, total_fee deducted from `value`.

State after transaction: Account A has 0.896 TON, Account B has 0 TON, Account C has 2.1 - (total_fee + `fwd_fee`) TON

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/carry_remaining_value_10.svg)

| Mode and Flags          | Code                         |
| :---------------------- | :--------------------------- |
| `mode` = 128, no `flag` | `send_raw_message(msg, 128)` |

## 11. Send all received tokens together with the contract balance and bounce the message on error

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON, Account C has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B** after that **B** sent 0.5 TON to **C** with `mode` = 144, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 1.1 - total_fee TON, total_fee deducted from `value`.

State after transaction with error: Account A has 1 - (total_fee + `fwd_fee`) TON, Account B has 1 TON, Account C has 1 TON

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/carry_remaining_value_11_error.svg)

:::info tip
If no errors the result is the same as [`mode = 128`](#10-send-all-received-tokens-together-with-the-contract-balance). This mode is actually used a lot in TON for jetton transfers, you can [check it in C5 action list](https://retracer.ton.org/?tx=e4f31e37eec74a8cfcecdad9246a6bbf3da20c4edb3635150cb0fa54b9def558) of the jetton wallet.
:::

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/carry_remaining_value_11_noerror.svg)

| Mode and Flags            | Code                         |
| :------------------------ | :--------------------------- |
| `mode` = 128, `flag` = 16 | `send_raw_message(msg, 144)` |

## 12. Send all received tokens together with the contract balance and destroy smart-contract

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON, Account C has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B** after that **B** sent 0.5 TON to **C** with `mode` = 160, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 1.1 - total_fee TON, total_fee deducted from `value`.

State after transaction: Account A has 0.896 TON, Account B has 0 TON and `nonexist`, Account C has 2.1 - (total_fee + `fwd_fee`) TON

When the balance reaches 0 TON destroy the contract.

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/carry_remaining_value_12.svg)

| Mode and Flags            | Code                         |
| :------------------------ | :--------------------------- |
| `mode` = 128, `flag` = 32 | `send_raw_message(msg, 160)` |

Commit message:

upd4
Added note about storage_fee

docs/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/message-management/message-modes-cookbook.mdx, after:

# Message Modes Cookbook

Understanding the different modes and flags available for sending messages is important to ensure that your smart contracts behave correctly.
While [message modes](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/message-management/sending-messages#message-modes) section provided detailed descriptions of these modes and flags, in this section we will illustrate their practical application with specific examples.

:::info IMPORTANT
You can check [this example](https://testnet.tonviewer.com/transaction/42ed45726e4fe994b7fd6dbf953a2ac24ecd77753858abeda9d6755c664a537a) as a real-world confirmation.
:::

#### Message value and account balance

Please check how [get_balance](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/func/docs/stdlib/#get_balance) works to understand transaction state better. Balance in

There are 2 ways to pay for blockchain action:

- From the [message value](/v3/documentation/data-formats/tlb/msg-tlb#commonmsginfo)
- From the [contract balance](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/blob/7151ff26279fef6dcfa1f47fc0c5b63677ae2458/crypto/block/block.tlb#L263C1-L265C20)

Typically it's charged from contract `balance`, but in specific cases it will use part of the message `value`.

#### Fees

Actual transaction fees will vary depending on blockchain configuration, code of the smart contract and other factors. When message is received, part of the contract `balance` will be consumed by [storage fees](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/transaction-fees/fees-low-level#storage-fee) and gas_fees if message `value` [is above certain amount](/v3/documentation/tvm/tvm-overview#compute-phase-skipped).

According to [transaction flow](/v3/documentation/tvm/tvm-overview#transactions-and-phases) there are 5 phases:

- Storage, consisting of [account storage](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/blob/7151ff26279fef6dcfa1f47fc0c5b63677ae2458/crypto/block/transaction.cpp#L651-L675) and [in_msg import](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/blob/7151ff26279fef6dcfa1f47fc0c5b63677ae2458/crypto/block/transaction.cpp#L783-L816)
- [Credit](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/blob/7151ff26279fef6dcfa1f47fc0c5b63677ae2458/crypto/block/transaction.cpp#L959-L981), where in_msg `value` is added to the `balance`
- Compute, where actual smart contract code is executed in TVM
- Action, where actions like `SENDRAWMSG` are performed
- Bounce, where everything about bouncing is handled

The order is: storage_fee -> import_fee -> gas_fee -> action_fee + fwd_fee

:::info IMPORTANT
The table is populated from [this example](https://tonviewer.com/transaction/b5e14a9c4a4e982fda42d6079c3f84fa48e76497a8f3fca872f9a3737f1f6262). You can check [**live calculator**](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/transaction-fees/fees#basic-fees-formula).
:::

| Fee in Explorer                                                                                   | Value       | How it's obtained               |
| :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | :---------- | :------------------------------ |
| Total fee                                                                                         | 0,001982134 | gas + storage + action + import |
| total_fwd_fees                                                                                    | 0,001       | fwd_fee + action_fee + ihr_fee  |
| gas_fees                                                                                          | 0,0011976   | compute phase, gas used         |
| storage_fees                                                                                      | 0,000000003 | storage phase, account only     |
| total_action_fees                                                                                 | 0,000133331 | action phase, cost per action   |
| import_fee (hidden)                                                                               | 0,0006512   | cost of import of ext_msg       |
| [fwd_fee](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/transaction-fees/fees-low-level#formula-1) (each msg) | 0,000266669 | cost of fwd of in_msg           |
| [ihr_fee](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/transaction-fees/fees-low-level#ihr) (each msg)       | 0.0006      | cost of ihr fwd of in_msg       |

:::info
The transaction fees used in these examples are hypothetical and are used for illustrative purposes only, any fees other than message forward are out of scope of this article.
:::

## 1. Send a regular message

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B**, [msg_fwd_fees](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/transaction-fees/fees-low-level#forward-fees) are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 0.096 TON, `fwd_fee` and `action_fee` deducted from `value`.

State after transaction: Account A has 0.9 TON, Account B has 1.096 TON

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/send_regular_message_1.svg)

| Mode and Flags        | Code                       |
| :-------------------- | :------------------------- |
| `mode` = 0, no `flag` | `send_raw_message(msg, 0)` |

## 2. Send a regular message, no bounce the message on error and ignore it

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B**, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 0.096 TON, `fwd_fee` and `action_fee` deducted from `value`.
In case of an error during transaction processing, the message will not bounce and will be ignored.

State after transaction: Account A has 0.9 TON, Account B has 1.096 TON

:::info tip
Funds included with an ignored message will still be [credited to the receiving address](https://testnet.tonviewer.com/transaction/8a388731812c80ab9b0ea9531108425488af5def854e4bd6f0ed47362b56d557).
If no errors the result is the same as [`mode = 0`](#1-send-a-regular-message).
:::

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/send_regular_message_2.svg)

| Mode and Flags         | Code                       |
| :--------------------- | :------------------------- |
| `mode` = 0, `flag` = 2 | `send_raw_message(msg, 2)` |

## 3. Send a regular message and bounce the message on action error

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B**, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 0.096 TON, `fwd_fee` and `action_fee` deducted from `value`.
In case of an error during [action phase](https://retracer.ton.org/?tx=e9dccba82badc0d742f14eff41c203280f380e87180b5314fcfd742856e598f7&testnet=true), the message will bounce and `total_fee` + `fwd_fee` will be deducted from `value`.

State after transaction with error: Account A has 1 - ([total_fee](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/transaction-fees/fees#basic-fees-formula) + `fwd_fee`) TON, Account B has 1 TON

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/send_regular_message_3_error.svg)

:::info tip
If no errors the result is the same as [`mode = 0`](#1-send-a-regular-message).
:::

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/send_regular_message_3_noerror.svg)

| Mode and Flags          | Code                        |
| :---------------------- | :-------------------------- |
| `mode` = 0, `flag` = 16 | `send_raw_message(msg, 16)` |

## 4. Send a regular message with separate fees

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B**, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 0.1 TON, `fwd_fee` and `action_fee` deducted from `balance`.

State after transaction: Account A has 0.896 TON, Account B has 1.1 TON

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/send_regular_message_4.svg)

| Mode and Flags         | Code                       |
| :--------------------- | :------------------------- |
| `mode` = 0, `flag` = 1 | `send_raw_message(msg, 1)` |

## 5. Send a regular message with separate fees and bounce the message on error

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B**, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 0.1 TON, `fwd_fee` and `action_fee` deducted from `balance`.
In case of an error [during action phase](https://retracer.ton.org/?tx=e9dccba82badc0d742f14eff41c203280f380e87180b5314fcfd742856e598f7&testnet=true), the message will bounce and `total_fee` + `fwd_fee` will be deducted from `value`.

State after transaction with error: Account A has 1 - ([total_fee](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/transaction-fees/fees#basic-fees-formula) + `fwd_fee`) TON, Account B has 1 TON

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/send_regular_message_5_error.svg)

:::info tip
If no errors the result is the same as [`mode = 1`](#4-send-a-regular-message-with-separate-fees).
:::

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/send_regular_message_5_noerror.svg)

| Mode and Flags                   | Code                        |
| :------------------------------- | :-------------------------- |
| `mode` = 0, `flag` = 1 + 16 = 17 | `send_raw_message(msg, 17)` |

## 6. Carry remaining value with new message

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON, Account C has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B** after that **B** sent 0.5 TON to **C** with `mode` = 64, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received `value` will be 0.6 TON, total_fee + `fwd_fee` deducted from `value`.

State after transaction: Account A has 0.896 TON, Account B has 0.5 TON, Account C has 1.6 - (total_fee + `fwd_fee`) TON

:::info
You might check [this example](https://retracer.ton.org/?tx=4340b5ecbd83227cc64e10b1ca7628352133cda1d608081fb2ed58d299f00936&testnet=true).
Please note that `storage_fee` is included in `total_fee` but it is always paid from contract `balance`.
:::

:::warning
Please note that `SENDRAWMSG` doesn't update balance.

If you try to send multiple messages (i.e. mode 0 **and** mode 64) you'll get exit code 37.
:::

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/carry_remaining_value_6.svg)

| Mode and Flags         | Code                        |
| :--------------------- | :-------------------------- |
| `mode` = 64, no `flag` | `send_raw_message(msg, 64)` |

## 7. Carry remaining value with new message with separate fees

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON, Account C has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B** after that **B** sent 0.5 TON to **C** with `mode` = 65, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 0.6 TON, total_fee + `fwd_fee` deducted from `balance`.

State after transaction: Account A has 0.896 TON, Account B has 0.5 - (total_fee + `fwd_fee`) TON, Account C has 1.6 TON

:::info
You might check [this example](https://retracer.ton.org/?tx=5c2525feeb3b93db594b7b11f3250430f02dd8616595cf2b1583ebc7da79d15b&testnet=true).
Please note that `storage_fee` is included in `total_fee` but it is always paid from contract `balance`.
:::

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/carry_remaining_value_7.svg)

| Mode and Flags          | Code                        |
| :---------------------- | :-------------------------- |
| `mode` = 64, `flag` = 1 | `send_raw_message(msg, 65)` |

## 8. Carry remaining value and bounce the message on error

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON, Account C has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B** after that **B** sent 0.5 TON to **C** with `mode` = 80, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 0.6 TON, total_fee + `fwd_fee` deducted from `value`.
In case of an error during action phase, the message will bounce and `total_fee` + `fwd_fee` will be deducted from `value`.

State after transaction with error: Account A has 1 - (total_fee + `fwd_fee`) TON, Account B has 1 TON, Account C has 1 TON

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/carry_remaining_value_8_error.svg)

:::info tip
If no errors the result is the same as [`mode = 64`](#6-carry-remaining-value-with-new-message). This mode is actually used a lot in TON for jetton transfers, you can [check it in C5 action list](https://retracer.ton.org/?tx=6489d60d9197c0be7ee64b0812139d82221e8f94c6e378c356acc10f9067310c) of the jetton wallet.
:::

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/carry_remaining_value_8_noerror.svg)

| Mode and Flags           | Code                        |
| :----------------------- | :-------------------------- |
| `mode` = 64, `flag` = 16 | `send_raw_message(msg, 80)` |

## 9. Carry remaining value with new message with separate fees and bounce the message on error

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON, Account C has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B** after that **B** sent 0.5 TON to **C** with `mode` = 80, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 0.6 TON, total_fee + `fwd_fee` deducted from `balance`.
In case of an error during action phase, the message will bounce and `total_fee` + `fwd_fee` will be deducted from `value`.

State after transaction with error: Account A has 1 - (total_fee + `fwd_fee`) TON, Account B has 1 TON, Account C has 1 TON

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/carry_remaining_value_9_error.svg)

:::info tip
If no errors the result is the same as [`mode = 65`](#7-carry-remaining-value-with-new-message-with-separate-fees).
:::

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/carry_remaining_value_9_noerror.svg)

| Mode and Flags               | Code                        |
| :--------------------------- | :-------------------------- |
| `mode` = 64, `flag` = 16 + 1 | `send_raw_message(msg, 81)` |

## 10. Send all received tokens together with the contract balance

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON, Account C has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B** after that **B** sent 0.5 TON to **C** with `mode` = 128, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 1.1 - total_fee TON, total_fee deducted from `value`.

State after transaction: Account A has 0.896 TON, Account B has 0 TON, Account C has 2.1 - (total_fee + `fwd_fee`) TON

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/carry_remaining_value_10.svg)

| Mode and Flags          | Code                         |
| :---------------------- | :--------------------------- |
| `mode` = 128, no `flag` | `send_raw_message(msg, 128)` |

## 11. Send all received tokens together with the contract balance and bounce the message on error

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON, Account C has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B** after that **B** sent 0.5 TON to **C** with `mode` = 144, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 1.1 - total_fee TON, total_fee deducted from `value`.

State after transaction with error: Account A has 1 - (total_fee + `fwd_fee`) TON, Account B has 1 TON, Account C has 1 TON

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/carry_remaining_value_11_error.svg)

:::info tip
If no errors the result is the same as [`mode = 128`](#10-send-all-received-tokens-together-with-the-contract-balance). This mode is actually used a lot in TON for jetton transfers, you can [check it in C5 action list](https://retracer.ton.org/?tx=e4f31e37eec74a8cfcecdad9246a6bbf3da20c4edb3635150cb0fa54b9def558) of the jetton wallet.
:::

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/carry_remaining_value_11_noerror.svg)

| Mode and Flags            | Code                         |
| :------------------------ | :--------------------------- |
| `mode` = 128, `flag` = 16 | `send_raw_message(msg, 144)` |

## 12. Send all received tokens together with the contract balance and destroy smart-contract

State before transaction: Account A has 1 TON, Account B has 1 TON, Account C has 1 TON

**A** sent 0.1 TON to **B** after that **B** sent 0.5 TON to **C** with `mode` = 160, `msg_fwd_fees` are 0.004 TON, actual received value will be 1.1 - total_fee TON, total_fee deducted from `value`.

State after transaction: Account A has 0.896 TON, Account B has 0 TON and `nonexist`, Account C has 2.1 - (total_fee + `fwd_fee`) TON

When the balance reaches 0 TON destroy the contract.

![](/img/docs/message-modes-cookbook/carry_remaining_value_12.svg)

| Mode and Flags            | Code                         |
| :------------------------ | :--------------------------- |
| `mode` = 128, `flag` = 32 | `send_raw_message(msg, 160)` |
