docs/develop/dapps/README.mdx, before:

import Button from '@site/src/components/button'

# Getting Started
Before diving into DApps, make sure you understand the underlying blockchain principles. You might find our [The Open Network](/learn/introduction) and [Blockchain of Blockchains](/learn/overviews/ton-blockchain) articles useful.

Comparing to the pure [Smart Contracts](/develop/smart-contracts/) development, DApps development is more complex. You need to understand [how to work with APIs](/develop/dapps/apis/), how to use authenticate user using [TON Connect](/develop/dapps/ton-connect/overview) and how to use [SDKs](/develop/dapps/apis/sdk) to work with the blockchain.

<Button href="/develop/dapps/telegram-apps/" colorType={'primary'} sizeType={'sm'}>Build a Mini App</Button>
<Button href="/develop/dapps/apis/sdk"
colorType="secondary" sizeType={'sm'}>
Choose an SDK
</Button>

## Basic Tools and Resources

Here are some key resources that you'll need throughout your DApp development journey:

1. [Developer Wallets](/participate/wallets/apps)
2. [Blockchain Explorers](/participate/explorers)
3. [API Documentation](/develop/dapps/apis/)
4. [SDKs for Various Languages](/develop/dapps/apis/sdk)
5. [Using the Testnet](/develop/smart-contracts/environment/testnet)
6. [TON Unfreezer](https://unfreezer.ton.org/)

### Asset Management

Working with assets? These guides cover the essentials:

- [Payments Processing](/develop/dapps/asset-processing/)
- [Token (Jetton) Processing](/develop/dapps/asset-processing/jettons)
- [Handling NFTs](/develop/dapps/asset-processing/nft)
- [Parsing Metadata](/develop/dapps/asset-processing/metadata)

### Introduction to DeFi

Interested in decentralized finance (DeFi)? Here's how to handle different types of assets:

- [Understanding Toncoin](/develop/dapps/defi/coins)
- [Tokens: Jettons & NFTs](/develop/dapps/defi/tokens)
- [TON Payments](/develop/dapps/defi/ton-payments)
- [Setting up Subscriptions](/develop/dapps/defi/subscriptions)

## Tutorials and Examples

### DeFi Basics

- Create Your First Token: [Mint Your First Jetton](/develop/dapps/tutorials/jetton-minter)
- Step by Step: [NFT Collection Minting](/develop/dapps/tutorials/collection-minting)

### Language-Specific Guides

#### JavaScript

- [Payment Process](https://github.com/toncenter/examples)
- [TON Bridge](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/bridge)
- [Web Wallet](https://github.com/toncenter/ton-wallet)
- [Dumpling Sales Bot](/develop/dapps/tutorials/accept-payments-in-a-telegram-bot-js)

#### Python

- [Example Projects](https://github.com/psylopunk/pytonlib/tree/main/examples)
- [Storefront Bot](/develop/dapps/tutorials/accept-payments-in-a-telegram-bot)

#### Go

- [Examples](https://github.com/xssnick/tonutils-go/tree/master/example)

### Advanced Topics

- [Zero-Knowledge Proofs](/develop/dapps/tutorials/simple-zk-on-ton)

### Wallets Examples

- [Desktop standard wallet (C++ and Qt)](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/wallet-desktop)
- [Android standard wallet (Java)](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/wallet-android)
- [iOS standard wallet (Swift)](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/wallet-ios)
- [TonLib CLI (C++)](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/blob/master/tonlib/tonlib/tonlib-cli.cpp)

## 👨‍💻 Contribution

Missing some crucial material? You can either write a tutorial yourself or describe the problem for the community.

<Button href="/contribute/participate" colorType="primary" sizeType={'sm'}>Contribute</Button>
  <Button href="https://github.com/ton-community/ton-docs/issues/new?assignees=&labels=feature+%3Asparkles%3A%2Ccontent+%3Afountain_pen%3A&template=suggest_tutorial.yaml&title=Suggest+a+tutorial" colorType={'secondary'} sizeType={'sm'}>Suggest a Tutorial</Button>

Commit message:

added many links to ton speedrun and ton course

docs/develop/dapps/README.mdx, after:

import Button from '@site/src/components/button'

# Getting Started
Before diving into DApps, make sure you understand the underlying blockchain principles. You might find our [The Open Network](/learn/introduction) and [Blockchain of Blockchains](/learn/overviews/ton-blockchain) articles useful.

Comparing to the pure [Smart Contracts](/develop/smart-contracts/) development, DApps development is more complex. You need to understand [how to work with APIs](/develop/dapps/apis/), how to use authenticate user using [TON Connect](/develop/dapps/ton-connect/overview) and how to use [SDKs](/develop/dapps/apis/sdk) to work with the blockchain.

<Button href="/develop/dapps/telegram-apps/" colorType={'primary'} sizeType={'sm'}>Build a Mini App</Button>
<Button href="/develop/dapps/apis/sdk"
colorType="secondary" sizeType={'sm'}>
Choose an SDK
</Button>


## TON Course: DApps

The [TON Blockchain Course](https://stepik.org/course/176754/) is a comprehensive guide to TON Blockchain development.

Module 5 and 6 completely covers DApps development. You'll learn how to create a DApp, how to work with TON Connect, how to use SDKs and how to work with the blockchain.

<Button href="https://stepik.org/course/176754/" colorType={'primary'} sizeType={'sm'}>Check TON Blockchain Course</Button>


## Basic Tools and Resources

Here are some key resources that you'll need throughout your DApp development journey:

1. [Developer Wallets](/participate/wallets/apps)
2. [Blockchain Explorers](/participate/explorers)
3. [API Documentation](/develop/dapps/apis/)
4. [SDKs for Various Languages](/develop/dapps/apis/sdk)
5. [Using the Testnet](/develop/smart-contracts/environment/testnet)
6. [TON Unfreezer](https://unfreezer.ton.org/)

### Asset Management

Working with assets? These guides cover the essentials:

- [Payments Processing](/develop/dapps/asset-processing/)
- [Token (Jetton) Processing](/develop/dapps/asset-processing/jettons)
- [Handling NFTs](/develop/dapps/asset-processing/nft)
- [Parsing Metadata](/develop/dapps/asset-processing/metadata)

### Introduction to DeFi

Interested in decentralized finance (DeFi)? Here's how to handle different types of assets:

- [Understanding Toncoin](/develop/dapps/defi/coins)
- [Tokens: Jettons & NFTs](/develop/dapps/defi/tokens)
- [TON Payments](/develop/dapps/defi/ton-payments)
- [Setting up Subscriptions](/develop/dapps/defi/subscriptions)

## Tutorials and Examples

### DeFi Basics

- Create Your First Token: [Mint Your First Jetton](/develop/dapps/tutorials/jetton-minter)
- Step by Step: [NFT Collection Minting](/develop/dapps/tutorials/collection-minting)

### Language-Specific Guides

#### JavaScript

- [Payment Process](https://github.com/toncenter/examples)
- [TON Bridge](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/bridge)
- [Web Wallet](https://github.com/toncenter/ton-wallet)
- [Dumpling Sales Bot](/develop/dapps/tutorials/accept-payments-in-a-telegram-bot-js)

#### Python

- [Example Projects](https://github.com/psylopunk/pytonlib/tree/main/examples)
- [Storefront Bot](/develop/dapps/tutorials/accept-payments-in-a-telegram-bot)

#### Go

- [Examples](https://github.com/xssnick/tonutils-go/tree/master/example)

### Advanced Topics

- [Zero-Knowledge Proofs](/develop/dapps/tutorials/simple-zk-on-ton)

### Wallets Examples

- [Desktop standard wallet (C++ and Qt)](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/wallet-desktop)
- [Android standard wallet (Java)](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/wallet-android)
- [iOS standard wallet (Swift)](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/wallet-ios)
- [TonLib CLI (C++)](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/blob/master/tonlib/tonlib/tonlib-cli.cpp)

## 👨‍💻 Contribution

Missing some crucial material? You can either write a tutorial yourself or describe the problem for the community.

<Button href="/contribute/participate" colorType="primary" sizeType={'sm'}>Contribute</Button>
  <Button href="https://github.com/ton-community/ton-docs/issues/new?assignees=&labels=feature+%3Asparkles%3A%2Ccontent+%3Afountain_pen%3A&template=suggest_tutorial.yaml&title=Suggest+a+tutorial" colorType={'secondary'} sizeType={'sm'}>Suggest a Tutorial</Button>
