docs/participate/web3/sites-and-proxy.md, before:

# Running your own TON proxy

The aim of this document is to provide a gentle introduction into TON Sites, which are websites accessed through the TON Network. TON Sites may be used as a convenient entry point for other TON Services. In particular, HTML pages downloaded from TON Sites may contain links to `ton://...` URIs representing payments that can be performed by the user by clicking on the link, provided a TON Wallet is installed on the user's device.

From the technical perspective, TON Sites are very much like standard websites, but they are accessed through the [TON Network](/learn/networking/overview) (which is an overlay network inside the Internet) instead of the Internet. More specifically, they have an [ADNL](/learn/networking/adnl) Address (instead of a more customary IPv4 or IPv6 address) and they accept HTTP queries via a [RLDP](/learn/networking/rldp) protocol (which is a higher-level RPC protocol built upon ADNL, the main protocol of TON Network) instead of the usual TCP/IP. All encryption is handled by ADNL, so there is no need to use HTTPS (i.e. TLS) in case the entry proxy is hosted locally on the user's device.

In order to access existing sites and create new TON, Sites one needs special gateways between the "ordinary" internet and the TON Network. Essentially, TON Sites are accessed with the aid of a HTTP->RLDP proxy running locally on the client's machine and they are created by means of a reverse RLDP->HTTP proxy running on a remote web server.

[Overview](https://telegra.ph/TON-Sites-TON-WWW-and-TON-Proxy-09-29-2)

## Running an entry proxy

In order to access existing TON Sites, you need to run a RLDP-HTTP Proxy on your computer.

1. Download **rldp-http-proxy** from [TON Auto Builds](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/actions?query=branch%3Amaster+is%3Acompleted) (`rldp-http-proxy` folder). Binaries are available for Windows, MacOS (Intel), Ubuntu.

Or you can compile the **rldp-http-proxy** yourself by following these [instructions](/develop/howto/compile#rldp-http-proxy).

2. [Download](/develop/howto/compile#download-global-config) TON global config.

3. Run **rldp-http-proxy**:

 ```
 rldp-http-proxy/rldp-http-proxy -p 8080 -c 3333 -C global.config.json
 ```

In the above example, `8080` is the TCP port that will be listened to at localhost for incoming HTTP queries, and `3333` is the UDP port that will be used for all outbound and inbound RLDP and ADNL activity (i.e. for connecting to TON Sites via the TON Network). `global.config.json` is the filename of TON global config.

If you have done everything correctly, the entry proxy will not terminate, but it will continue running in the terminal. It can now be used for accessing TON Sites. When you don't need it anymore, you can terminate it by pressing `Ctrl-C`, or simply by closing the terminal window.

Your entry proxy will be available by HTTP on `localhost` port `8080`.

## Running an entry proxy on a remote computer

1. Download **rldp-http-proxy** from [TON Auto Builds](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/actions?query=branch%3Amaster+is%3Acompleted) (`rldp-http-proxy` folder). Binaries available for Windows, MacOS (Intel), Ubuntu.

Or you can compile the **rldp-http-proxy** yourself by following these [instructions](/develop/howto/compile#rldp-http-proxy).

2. [Download](/develop/howto/compile#download-global-config) TON global config.

3. Download **generate-random-id** from [TON Auto Builds](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/actions?query=branch%3Amaster+is%3Acompleted) (`generate-random-id` folder). Binaries are available for Windows, MacOS (Intel), Ubuntu.

Or you can compile the **generate-random-id** yourself by following these [instructions](/develop/howto/compile#generate-random-id).

4. Generate a persistent ANDL Address for your entry proxy

```
mkdir keyring

utils/generate-random-id -m adnlid
```

You see something like

```
45061C1D4EC44A937D0318589E13C73D151D1CEF5D3C0E53AFBCF56A6C2FE2BD vcqmha5j3ceve35ammfrhqty46rkhi455otydstv66pk2tmf7rl25f3
```

This is your newly-generated persistent ADNL Address, in hexadecimal and user-friendly form. The corresponding private key is saved into file `45061...2DB` in the current directory. Move it into the keyring directory:

```
mv 45061C1* keyring/
```

6. Run **rldp-http-proxy**:

 ```
 rldp-http-proxy/rldp-http-proxy -p 8080 -a <your_public_ip>:3333 -C global.config.json -A <your_adnl_address>
 ```

where `<your_public_ip>` is your public IPv4 address and `<your_adnl_address>` is the ADNL Address generated in the previous step.

Example:
 ```
 rldp-http-proxy/rldp-http-proxy -p 8080 -a 777.777.777.777:3333 -C global.config.json -A vcqmha5j3ceve35ammfrhqty46rkhi455otydstv66pk2tmf7rl25f3
 ```

In the above example, `8080` is the TCP port that will be listened to at localhost for incoming HTTP queries, and `3333` is the UDP port that will be used for all outbound and inbound RLDP and ADNL activity (i.e. for connecting to TON Sites via the TON Network). `global.config.json` is the filename of TON global config.

If you have done everything correctly, the Proxy will not terminate, but it will continue running in the terminal. It can be used now for accessing TON Sites. When you don't need it anymore, you can terminate it by pressing `Ctrl-C`, or simply by closing the terminal window. You can run this as a unix service to run permanently.

Your entry proxy will be available by HTTP on `<your_public_ip>` port `8080`.

## Accessing TON Sites

Now suppose that you have a running instance of the RLDP-HTTP Proxy running on your computer and listening on `localhost:8080` for inbound TCP connections, as explained [above](#running-entry-proxy).

A simple test that everything is working properly may be performed using programs such as `curl` or `wget`. For example,

```
curl -x 127.0.0.1:8080 http://just-for-test.ton
```

attempts to download the main page of (TON) Site `just-for-test.ton` using the proxy at `127.0.0.1:8080`. If the proxy is up and running, you'll see something like

```html

<html>
<head>
<title>TON Site</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>TON Proxy Works!</h1>
</body>
</html>

```

You can also access TON Sites by means of their ADNL Addresses by using a fake domain `<adnl-addr>.adnl`:

```bash
curl -x 127.0.0.1:8080 http://utoljjye6y4ixazesjofidlkrhyiakiwrmes3m5hthlc6ie2h72gllt.adnl/
```
currently fetches the same TON Web page.

Alternatively, you can set up `localhost:8080` as a HTTP proxy in your browser. For example, if you use Firefox, visit [Setup] -> General -> Network Settings -> Settings -> Configure Proxy Access -> Manual Proxy configuration, and type "127.0.0.1" into the field "HTTP Proxy", and "8080" into the field "Port".

Once you have set up `localhost:8080` as the HTTP proxy to be used in your browser, you can simply type the required URI, such as `http://just-for-test.ton` or `http://utoljjye6y4ixazesjofidlkrhyiakiwrmes3m5hthlc6ie2h72gllt.adnl/`, in the navigation bar of your browser, and interact with the TON Site in the same way as with the usual Web Sites.

## Running TON Site

Most people will need just to access existing TON Sites, not to create new ones. However, if you want to create one, you'll need to run RLDP-HTTP Proxy on your server, along with the usual web server software such as Apache or Nginx.

We suppose that you know already how to set up an ordinary website, and that you have already configured one on your server, are accepting incoming HTTP connections on TCP port `<your-server-ip>:80`, and have defined the required TON Network domain name (e.g. `example.ton`) as the main domain name or an alias for your website in the configuration of your web server.

1. Download **rldp-http-proxy** from [TON Auto Builds](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/actions?query=branch%3Amaster+is%3Acompleted) (`rldp-http-proxy` folder). Binaries available for Windows, MacOS (Intel), Ubuntu.

Or you can compile the **rldp-http-proxy** yourself by this [instruction](/develop/howto/compile#rldp-http-proxy).

2. [Download](/develop/howto/compile#download-global-config) TON global config.

3. Download **generate-random-id** from [TON Auto Builds](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/actions?query=branch%3Amaster+is%3Acompleted) (`generate-random-id` folder). Binaries available for Windows, MacOS (Intel), Ubuntu.

Or you can compile the **generate-random-id** yourself by following these [instructions](/develop/howto/compile#generate-random-id).

4. Generate a persistent ANDL Address for your server

```bash
mkdir keyring

utils/generate-random-id -m adnlid
```

You see something like

```bash
45061C1D4EC44A937D0318589E13C73D151D1CEF5D3C0E53AFBCF56A6C2FE2BD vcqmha5j3ceve35ammfrhqty46rkhi455otydstv66pk2tmf7rl25f3
```

This is your newly-generated persistent ADNL Address, in hexadecimal and user-friendly form. The corresponding private key is saved into file `45061...2DB` in the current directory. Move it into the keyring directory:

```bash
mv 45061C1* keyring/
```

5. Make sure your webserver accepts HTTP requests with .ton and .adnl domains.

For example if you use nginx with config `server_name example.com;`, you need to change it to `server_name _;` or `server_name example.com example.ton vcqmha5j3ceve35ammfrhqty46rkhi455otydstv66pk2tmf7rl25f3.adnl;`.

6. Run the proxy in reverse mode:

 ```bash
 rldp-http-proxy/rldp-http-proxy -a <your-server-ip>:3333 -L '*' -C global.config.json -A <your-adnl-address> -d -l <log-file>
 ```

where `<your_public_ip>` is your server public IPv4 address and `<your_adnl_address>` is the ADNL Address generated in the previous step.

If you want your TON Site to run permanently, you'll have to use options `-d` and `-l <log-file>`.

Example:
 ```bash
 rldp-http-proxy/rldp-http-proxy -a 777.777.777.777:3333 -L '*' -C global.config.json -A vcqmha5j3ceve35ammfrhqty46rkhi455otydstv66pk2tmf7rl25f3 -d -l tonsite.log
 ```

If all works properly, the RLDP-HTTP proxy will accept incoming HTTP queries from the TON Network via RLDP/ADNL running on UDP port 3333 (of course, you can use any other UDP port if you want to) of IPv4 address `<your-server-ip>` (in particular, if you are using a firewall, don't forget to allow `rldp-http-proxy` to receive and send UDP packets from this port), and it will forward these HTTP queries addressed to all hosts (if you want to forward only specific hosts, change `-L '*'` to `-L <your hostname>`) to TCP port `80` at `127.0.0.1` (i.e. to your ordinary Web server).

You can visit TON Site `http://<your-adnl-address>.adnl` (`http://vcqmha5j3ceve35ammfrhqty46rkhi455otydstv66pk2tmf7rl25f3.adnl` in this example) from a browser running on a client machine as explained in the "Accessing TON Sites" Section and check whether your TON Site is actually available to the public.

If you want to, you can [register](/participate/web3/site-management) a TON DNS domain, such as 'example.ton', and create a `site` record for this domain pointing to the persistent ADNL Address of your TON Site. Then the RLDP-HTTP proxies running in client mode would resolve http://example.ton as pointing to your ADNL Address and will access your TON Site.

You can also run a reverse proxy on a separate server and set your webserver as a remote address. In this case use `-R '*'@<YOUR_WEB_SERVER_HTTP_IP>:<YOUR_WEB_SERVER_HTTP_PORT>` instead of `-L '*'`.

Example:
```bash
rldp-http-proxy/rldp-http-proxy -a 777.777.777.777:3333 -R '*'@333.333.333.333:80 -C global.config.json -A vcqmha5j3ceve35ammfrhqty46rkhi455otydstv66pk2tmf7rl25f3 -d -l tonsite.log
```

In this case your regular webserver should be available on http://333.333.333.333:80 (this IP will not be exposed to the outside).

### Recommendations

Since anonymity will only be available in TON Proxy 2.0, if you do not want to disclose the IP address of your web server, you can do it in two ways:

 * Run a reverse proxy on a separate server with `-R` flag as described above.

 * Make a duplicate server with copy of your website and run reverse proxy locally.

Commit message:

all updates of Docs from 11.10

docs/participate/web3/sites-and-proxy.md, after:

# Running your own TON proxy

The aim of this document is to provide a gentle introduction into TON Sites, which are websites accessed through the TON Network. TON Sites may be used as a convenient entry point for other TON Services. In particular, HTML pages downloaded from TON Sites may contain links to `ton://...` URIs representing payments that can be performed by the user by clicking on the link, provided a TON Wallet is installed on the user's device.

From the technical perspective, TON Sites are very much like standard websites, but they are accessed through the [TON Network](/learn/networking/overview) (which is an overlay network inside the Internet) instead of the Internet. More specifically, they have an [ADNL](/learn/networking/adnl) Address (instead of a more customary IPv4 or IPv6 address) and they accept HTTP queries via a [RLDP](/learn/networking/rldp) protocol (which is a higher-level RPC protocol built upon ADNL, the main protocol of TON Network) instead of the usual TCP/IP. All encryption is handled by ADNL, so there is no need to use HTTPS (i.e. TLS) in case the entry proxy is hosted locally on the user's device.

In order to access existing sites and create new TON, Sites one needs special gateways between the "ordinary" internet and the TON Network. Essentially, TON Sites are accessed with the aid of a HTTP->RLDP proxy running locally on the client's machine and they are created by means of a reverse RLDP->HTTP proxy running on a remote web server.

[Read more about TON Sites, WWW, and Proxy](/learn/services/sites-www-proxy)

## Running an entry proxy

In order to access existing TON Sites, you need to run a RLDP-HTTP Proxy on your computer.

1. Download **rldp-http-proxy** from [TON Auto Builds](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/actions?query=branch%3Amaster+is%3Acompleted) (`rldp-http-proxy` folder). Binaries are available for Windows, MacOS (Intel), Ubuntu.

Or you can compile the **rldp-http-proxy** yourself by following these [instructions](/develop/howto/compile#rldp-http-proxy).

2. [Download](/develop/howto/compile#download-global-config) TON global config.

3. Run **rldp-http-proxy**:

 ```
 rldp-http-proxy/rldp-http-proxy -p 8080 -c 3333 -C global.config.json
 ```

In the above example, `8080` is the TCP port that will be listened to at localhost for incoming HTTP queries, and `3333` is the UDP port that will be used for all outbound and inbound RLDP and ADNL activity (i.e. for connecting to TON Sites via the TON Network). `global.config.json` is the filename of TON global config.

If you have done everything correctly, the entry proxy will not terminate, but it will continue running in the terminal. It can now be used for accessing TON Sites. When you don't need it anymore, you can terminate it by pressing `Ctrl-C`, or simply by closing the terminal window.

Your entry proxy will be available by HTTP on `localhost` port `8080`.

## Running an entry proxy on a remote computer

1. Download **rldp-http-proxy** from [TON Auto Builds](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/actions?query=branch%3Amaster+is%3Acompleted) (`rldp-http-proxy` folder). Binaries available for Windows, MacOS (Intel), Ubuntu.

Or you can compile the **rldp-http-proxy** yourself by following these [instructions](/develop/howto/compile#rldp-http-proxy).

2. [Download](/develop/howto/compile#download-global-config) TON global config.

3. Download **generate-random-id** from [TON Auto Builds](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/actions?query=branch%3Amaster+is%3Acompleted) (`generate-random-id` folder). Binaries are available for Windows, MacOS (Intel), Ubuntu.

Or you can compile the **generate-random-id** yourself by following these [instructions](/develop/howto/compile#generate-random-id).

4. Generate a persistent ANDL Address for your entry proxy

```
mkdir keyring

utils/generate-random-id -m adnlid
```

You see something like

```
45061C1D4EC44A937D0318589E13C73D151D1CEF5D3C0E53AFBCF56A6C2FE2BD vcqmha5j3ceve35ammfrhqty46rkhi455otydstv66pk2tmf7rl25f3
```

This is your newly-generated persistent ADNL Address, in hexadecimal and user-friendly form. The corresponding private key is saved into file `45061...2DB` in the current directory. Move it into the keyring directory:

```
mv 45061C1* keyring/
```

6. Run **rldp-http-proxy**:

 ```
 rldp-http-proxy/rldp-http-proxy -p 8080 -a <your_public_ip>:3333 -C global.config.json -A <your_adnl_address>
 ```

where `<your_public_ip>` is your public IPv4 address and `<your_adnl_address>` is the ADNL Address generated in the previous step.

Example:
 ```
 rldp-http-proxy/rldp-http-proxy -p 8080 -a 777.777.777.777:3333 -C global.config.json -A vcqmha5j3ceve35ammfrhqty46rkhi455otydstv66pk2tmf7rl25f3
 ```

In the above example, `8080` is the TCP port that will be listened to at localhost for incoming HTTP queries, and `3333` is the UDP port that will be used for all outbound and inbound RLDP and ADNL activity (i.e. for connecting to TON Sites via the TON Network). `global.config.json` is the filename of TON global config.

If you have done everything correctly, the Proxy will not terminate, but it will continue running in the terminal. It can be used now for accessing TON Sites. When you don't need it anymore, you can terminate it by pressing `Ctrl-C`, or simply by closing the terminal window. You can run this as a unix service to run permanently.

Your entry proxy will be available by HTTP on `<your_public_ip>` port `8080`.

## Accessing TON Sites

Now suppose that you have a running instance of the RLDP-HTTP Proxy running on your computer and listening on `localhost:8080` for inbound TCP connections, as explained [above](#running-entry-proxy).

A simple test that everything is working properly may be performed using programs such as `curl` or `wget`. For example,

```
curl -x 127.0.0.1:8080 http://just-for-test.ton
```

attempts to download the main page of (TON) Site `just-for-test.ton` using the proxy at `127.0.0.1:8080`. If the proxy is up and running, you'll see something like

```html

<html>
<head>
<title>TON Site</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>TON Proxy Works!</h1>
</body>
</html>

```

You can also access TON Sites by means of their ADNL Addresses by using a fake domain `<adnl-addr>.adnl`:

```bash
curl -x 127.0.0.1:8080 http://utoljjye6y4ixazesjofidlkrhyiakiwrmes3m5hthlc6ie2h72gllt.adnl/
```
currently fetches the same TON Web page.

Alternatively, you can set up `localhost:8080` as a HTTP proxy in your browser. For example, if you use Firefox, visit [Setup] -> General -> Network Settings -> Settings -> Configure Proxy Access -> Manual Proxy configuration, and type "127.0.0.1" into the field "HTTP Proxy", and "8080" into the field "Port".

Once you have set up `localhost:8080` as the HTTP proxy to be used in your browser, you can simply type the required URI, such as `http://just-for-test.ton` or `http://utoljjye6y4ixazesjofidlkrhyiakiwrmes3m5hthlc6ie2h72gllt.adnl/`, in the navigation bar of your browser, and interact with the TON Site in the same way as with the usual Web Sites.

## Running TON Site

:::tip tutorial found!
Hey! Don't want to start from beginner-friendly tutorial [How to run TON Site?](/develop/dapps/tutorials/how-to-run-ton-site)
:::

Most people will need just to access existing TON Sites, not to create new ones. However, if you want to create one, you'll need to run RLDP-HTTP Proxy on your server, along with the usual web server software such as Apache or Nginx.

We suppose that you know already how to set up an ordinary website, and that you have already configured one on your server, are accepting incoming HTTP connections on TCP port `<your-server-ip>:80`, and have defined the required TON Network domain name (e.g. `example.ton`) as the main domain name or an alias for your website in the configuration of your web server.

1. Download **rldp-http-proxy** from [TON Auto Builds](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/actions?query=branch%3Amaster+is%3Acompleted) (`rldp-http-proxy` folder). Binaries available for Windows, MacOS (Intel), Ubuntu.

Or you can compile the **rldp-http-proxy** yourself by this [instruction](/develop/howto/compile#rldp-http-proxy).

2. [Download](/develop/howto/compile#download-global-config) TON global config.

3. Download **generate-random-id** from [TON Auto Builds](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/actions?query=branch%3Amaster+is%3Acompleted) (`generate-random-id` folder). Binaries available for Windows, MacOS (Intel), Ubuntu.

Or you can compile the **generate-random-id** yourself by following these [instructions](/develop/howto/compile#generate-random-id).

4. Generate a persistent ANDL Address for your server

```bash
mkdir keyring

utils/generate-random-id -m adnlid
```

You see something like

```bash
45061C1D4EC44A937D0318589E13C73D151D1CEF5D3C0E53AFBCF56A6C2FE2BD vcqmha5j3ceve35ammfrhqty46rkhi455otydstv66pk2tmf7rl25f3
```

This is your newly-generated persistent ADNL Address, in hexadecimal and user-friendly form. The corresponding private key is saved into file `45061...2DB` in the current directory. Move it into the keyring directory:

```bash
mv 45061C1* keyring/
```

5. Make sure your webserver accepts HTTP requests with .ton and .adnl domains.

For example if you use nginx with config `server_name example.com;`, you need to change it to `server_name _;` or `server_name example.com example.ton vcqmha5j3ceve35ammfrhqty46rkhi455otydstv66pk2tmf7rl25f3.adnl;`.

6. Run the proxy in reverse mode:

 ```bash
 rldp-http-proxy/rldp-http-proxy -a <your-server-ip>:3333 -L '*' -C global.config.json -A <your-adnl-address> -d -l <log-file>
 ```

where `<your_public_ip>` is your server public IPv4 address and `<your_adnl_address>` is the ADNL Address generated in the previous step.

If you want your TON Site to run permanently, you'll have to use options `-d` and `-l <log-file>`.

Example:
 ```bash
 rldp-http-proxy/rldp-http-proxy -a 777.777.777.777:3333 -L '*' -C global.config.json -A vcqmha5j3ceve35ammfrhqty46rkhi455otydstv66pk2tmf7rl25f3 -d -l tonsite.log
 ```

If all works properly, the RLDP-HTTP proxy will accept incoming HTTP queries from the TON Network via RLDP/ADNL running on UDP port 3333 (of course, you can use any other UDP port if you want to) of IPv4 address `<your-server-ip>` (in particular, if you are using a firewall, don't forget to allow `rldp-http-proxy` to receive and send UDP packets from this port), and it will forward these HTTP queries addressed to all hosts (if you want to forward only specific hosts, change `-L '*'` to `-L <your hostname>`) to TCP port `80` at `127.0.0.1` (i.e. to your ordinary Web server).

You can visit TON Site `http://<your-adnl-address>.adnl` (`http://vcqmha5j3ceve35ammfrhqty46rkhi455otydstv66pk2tmf7rl25f3.adnl` in this example) from a browser running on a client machine as explained in the "Accessing TON Sites" Section and check whether your TON Site is actually available to the public.

If you want to, you can [register](/participate/web3/site-management) a TON DNS domain, such as 'example.ton', and create a `site` record for this domain pointing to the persistent ADNL Address of your TON Site. Then the RLDP-HTTP proxies running in client mode would resolve http://example.ton as pointing to your ADNL Address and will access your TON Site.

You can also run a reverse proxy on a separate server and set your webserver as a remote address. In this case use `-R '*'@<YOUR_WEB_SERVER_HTTP_IP>:<YOUR_WEB_SERVER_HTTP_PORT>` instead of `-L '*'`.

Example:
```bash
rldp-http-proxy/rldp-http-proxy -a 777.777.777.777:3333 -R '*'@333.333.333.333:80 -C global.config.json -A vcqmha5j3ceve35ammfrhqty46rkhi455otydstv66pk2tmf7rl25f3 -d -l tonsite.log
```

In this case your regular webserver should be available on http://333.333.333.333:80 (this IP will not be exposed to the outside).

### Recommendations

Since anonymity will only be available in TON Proxy 2.0, if you do not want to disclose the IP address of your web server, you can do it in two ways:

 * Run a reverse proxy on a separate server with `-R` flag as described above.

 * Make a duplicate server with copy of your website and run reverse proxy locally.
