docs/v3/contribute/maintainers.md, before:

# Maintainers

## Active Team

Below is an alphabetical list of the current members on the TON Docs team.

### Alex Golev

TON Docs maintainer and DevRel at TON Foundation

-   Telegram: [@alexgton](https://t.me/alexgton)
-   GitHub: [Reveloper](https://github.com/Reveloper)

### Gusarich

Web3 Developer, [TON Dev community](https://github.com/ton-community) contributor, [TON Footsteps](https://github.com/ton-society/ton-footsteps) and TON Docs maintainer

-   Telegram: [@Gusarich](https://t.me/Gusarich)
-   GitHub: [Gusarich](https://github.com/Gusarich)

### SwiftAdviser

Developer Onboarding Manager at TON Foundation

-   Telegram: [@SwiftAdviser](https://t.me/SwiftAdviser)
-   GitHub: [SwiftAdviser](https://github.com/SwiftAdviser)

## Acknowledgements

TON Docs was originally created by [tolya-yanot](https://github.com/tolya-yanot) and [EmelyanenkoK](https://github.com/EmelyanenkoK).

Over time, TON Docs has benefitted from the intellect and dedication of [numerous external contributors](https://github.com/ton-community/ton-docs/graphs/contributors). We extend our heartfelt gratitude to each of them.

However, we would like to specially acknowledge the substantial contributions made by the following individuals. Their respective contributions have greatly enriched the quality and depth of our documentation:

-   [akifoq](https://github.com/akifoq): early contributions
-   [amnch1](https://github.com/amnch1): fixes
-   [aSpite](https://github.com/aSpite): content
-   [awesome-doge](https://github.com/awesome-doge): early contributions
-   [coalus](https://github.com/coalus): content
-   [delovoyhomie](https://github.com/delovoyhomie): content
-   [krau5](https://github.com/krau5): improvements
-   [LevZed](https://github.com/LevZed): content
-   [ProgramCrafter](https://github.com/ProgramCrafter): content
-   [siandreev](https://github.com/siandreev): content
-   [SpyCheese](https://github.com/SpyCheese): early contributions
-   [Tal Kol](https://github.com/talkol): early contributions
-   [TrueCarry](https://github.com/TrueCarry): content
-   [xssnick](https://github.com/xssnick): content

Our sincere appreciation to each and every contributor who has aided in making TON Docs a rich and reliable resource.

Commit message:

Doc editor guidelines (#947)
* update_contributors_list

* init_commit

* add_sidebar

* add_style_guide_drafts

* fix_typos

* add_linking_policy

* add_contribute_rules

* update_wordlist

* update_cspell

* update_editor_guidelines

* update_content_and_style

* Readme_proofread

* proofread content-standardization.mdx

* Update README.md

* Update content-standardization.mdx

* Proofread content-standardization.mdx

* clarify_contribution_flow

* mark_outdated_page

* typography_proofread

* style-guide.mdx_proofread

* typography_proofread

* maintainers_proofread

* typography_proofread

* content-standardization_proofread

* fix_formatting_and_beauty

docs/v3/contribute/maintainers.md, after:

# Maintainers

## Active team

Below is an alphabetical list of the current members of the TON documentation team.

### Alex Golev

Onboarding Lead at TON Studio

-   Telegram: [@alexgton](https://t.me/alexgton)
-   GitHub: [Reveloper](https://github.com/Reveloper)

## Acknowledgements

TON documentation was created by [tolya-yanot](https://github.com/tolya-yanot) and [EmelyanenkoK](https://github.com/EmelyanenkoK).

Over time, TON documentation has benefitted from the intellect and dedication of [numerous external contributors](https://github.com/ton-community/ton-docs/graphs/contributors). We extend our heartfelt gratitude to each of them.

However, we would like to acknowledge the substantial contributions made by the following individuals especially. Their respective contributions have greatly enriched the quality and depth of our documentation:

-   [akifoq](https://github.com/akifoq): early contributions
-   [amnch1](https://github.com/amnch1): fixes
-   [aSpite](https://github.com/aSpite): content
-   [awesome-doge](https://github.com/awesome-doge): early contributions
-   [coalus](https://github.com/coalus): content
-   [delovoyhomie](https://github.com/delovoyhomie): content
-   [Gusarich](https://github.com/Gusarich): content
-   [krau5](https://github.com/krau5): improvements
-   [LevZed](https://github.com/LevZed): content
-   [ProgramCrafter](https://github.com/ProgramCrafter): content
-   [siandreev](https://github.com/siandreev): content
-   [SpyCheese](https://github.com/SpyCheese): early contributions
-   [SwiftAdviser](https://github.com/SwiftAdviser): content, user-friendly docs inventor
-   [Tal Kol](https://github.com/talkol): early contributions
-   [TrueCarry](https://github.com/TrueCarry): content
-   [xssnick](https://github.com/xssnick): content

We sincerely appreciate each contributor who has helped make TON documentation a rich and reliable resource.

## See also

- [How to contribute](/v3/contribute/)
- [Content standardization](/v3/contribute/content-standardization/)
- [Typography](/v3/contribute/typography/)
- [Localization program](/v3/contribute/localization-program/overview/)
