docs/v3/contribute/participate.md, before:


# Contribution Guide

Here is a step-by-step guide of contributing to TON Documentation with Tutorials.

:::tip opportunity
You're lucky! It's a good opportunity to improve TON Ecosystem here.
:::

If you decide to write tutorial, you can get some reward for outstanding materials:
- **Special TON Bounty NFT** for the most valuable contributing to TON
- **Reward in TON** as payment for approved high-quality contribution like tutorial

Let's see how you can participate in contributing process.

## Decide what you want to write

Find or write a material which you want to describe.
1. Check a [list of issues on TON Docs GitHub](https://github.com/ton-community/ton-docs/issues) with `tutorial` label.
2. _OR_ write your own idea on TON Docs GitHub with [tutorial template](https://github.com/ton-community/ton-docs/issues/new?assignees=&labels=feature+%3Asparkles%3A%2Ccontent+%3Afountain_pen%3A&template=suggest_tutorial.yaml&title=Suggest+a+tutorial).

## Describe a problem to get a reward

Write a _ton-footstep_ to receive a funding for your contributing.
1. Read about [TON Bounties](https://github.com/ton-society/grants-and-bounties/blob/main/bounties/BOUNTIES_PROGRAM_GUIDELINES.md) program more detailed.
    1. **TLDR:** Use [Improve TVM Instructions article](https://github.com/ton-society/grants-and-bounties/issues/361) as an example.
2. Write [your own bounty](https://github.com/ton-society/grants-and-bounties/issues/new/choose) to participate and wait for approve. [TON Bounties Creator Bot](https://t.me/footsteps_helper_bot) will help you.
3. After received `approved` label start to write your tutorial.

## Writing a tutorial

**Preparations**. Minimize future amount of requested changes, _save your time_:
1. Follow [Tutorial Guidelines](/v3/contribute/contribution-rules) and check them with [Sample Tutorial Structure](/v3/contribute/tutorials/sample-tutorial)
2. Read [Principles of a Good Tutorial](/v3/contribute/tutorials/principles-of-a-good-tutorial) to write amazing tutorial :)
3. Inspire with [Mint your first Jetton](/v3/guidelines/dapps/tutorials/mint-your-first-token) example in sources.
4. **Setup environment**. [Check the tutorial](/v3/contribute#online-one-click-contribution-setup) running your fork locally or using Gitpod.
5. **Write tutorial**. Using the environment, see how tutorial looks like on your fork.
6. **Make a Pull Request**. Open PR to get some feedback from maintainers.
7. Get merged!

## Receiving a reward

1. After your PR in TON Docs got merged, please write in your ton-footsteps task.
2. Follow a guide [How to complete ton-bounty?](https://github.com/ton-society/grants-and-bounties/blob/main/bounties/BOUNTIES_PROGRAM_GUIDELINES.md#got-assigned-submit-a-questbook-proposal) to complete bounty and get reward.
3. In your task, you will be asked for a wallet to send a reward.
4. Get rewarded!

Commit message:

Doc editor guidelines (#947)
* update_contributors_list

* init_commit

* add_sidebar

* add_style_guide_drafts

* fix_typos

* add_linking_policy

* add_contribute_rules

* update_wordlist

* update_cspell

* update_editor_guidelines

* update_content_and_style

* Readme_proofread

* proofread content-standardization.mdx

* Update README.md

* Update content-standardization.mdx

* Proofread content-standardization.mdx

* clarify_contribution_flow

* mark_outdated_page

* typography_proofread

* style-guide.mdx_proofread

* typography_proofread

* maintainers_proofread

* typography_proofread

* content-standardization_proofread

* fix_formatting_and_beauty

docs/v3/contribute/participate.md, after:


# Contribution Guide

:::danger
This page is outdated and will be deleted soon.
See the [How to contribute](/v3/contribute/).
:::

Here is a step-by-step guide of contributing to TON Documentation with Tutorials.

:::tip opportunity
You're lucky! It's a good opportunity to improve TON Ecosystem here.
:::

If you decide to write tutorial, you can get some reward for outstanding materials:
- **Special TON Bounty NFT** for the most valuable contributing to TON
- **Reward in TON** as payment for approved high-quality contribution like tutorial

Let's see how you can participate in contributing process.

## Decide what you want to write

Find or write a material which you want to describe.
1. Check a [list of issues on TON Docs GitHub](https://github.com/ton-community/ton-docs/issues) with `tutorial` label.
2. _OR_ write your own idea on TON Docs GitHub with [tutorial template](https://github.com/ton-community/ton-docs/issues/new?assignees=&labels=feature+%3Asparkles%3A%2Ccontent+%3Afountain_pen%3A&template=suggest_tutorial.yaml&title=Suggest+a+tutorial).

## Describe a problem to get a reward

Write a _ton-footstep_ to receive a funding for your contributing.
1. Read about [TON Bounties](https://github.com/ton-society/grants-and-bounties/blob/main/bounties/BOUNTIES_PROGRAM_GUIDELINES.md) program more detailed.
    1. **TLDR:** Use [Improve TVM Instructions article](https://github.com/ton-society/grants-and-bounties/issues/361) as an example.
2. Write [your own bounty](https://github.com/ton-society/grants-and-bounties/issues/new/choose) to participate and wait for approve. [TON Bounties Creator Bot](https://t.me/footsteps_helper_bot) will help you.
3. After received `approved` label start to write your tutorial.

## Writing a tutorial

**Preparations**. Minimize future amount of requested changes, _save your time_:
1. Follow [Tutorial Guidelines](/v3/contribute/contribution-rules) and check them with [Sample Tutorial Structure](/v3/contribute/tutorials/sample-tutorial)
2. Read [Principles of a Good Tutorial](/v3/contribute/tutorials/principles-of-a-good-tutorial) to write amazing tutorial :)
3. Inspire with [Mint your first Jetton](/v3/guidelines/dapps/tutorials/mint-your-first-token) example in sources.
4. **Setup environment**. [Check the tutorial](/v3/contribute#online-one-click-contribution-setup) running your fork locally or using Gitpod.
5. **Write tutorial**. Using the environment, see how tutorial looks like on your fork.
6. **Make a Pull Request**. Open PR to get some feedback from maintainers.
7. Get merged!

## Receiving a reward

1. After your PR in TON Docs got merged, please write in your ton-footsteps task.
2. Follow a guide [How to complete ton-bounty?](https://github.com/ton-society/grants-and-bounties/blob/main/bounties/BOUNTIES_PROGRAM_GUIDELINES.md#got-assigned-submit-a-questbook-proposal) to complete bounty and get reward.
3. In your task, you will be asked for a wallet to send a reward.
4. Get rewarded!
