docs/v3/guidelines/dapps/tma/tutorials/design-guidelines.mdx, before:


# TMA Design Guidelines

:::info
Starting with version **6.10**, Telegram has updated the color palette for Mini Apps: a couple of old ones were fixed, and new ones were added.
:::

For context let's remember the history of updates.



Changelog.
1. The `bg_color` and `secondary_bg_color` have been updated.

![](/img/docs/tma-design-guidelines/tma-design_1.png)


What are the reasons:

• These colors were originally intended for use on page backgrounds, not UI controls.

• Therefore, for consistency, they have been updated.

• To color the backgrounds of different sections and cards, section_bg_color was added.

To improve the appearance of your applications, you should slightly adjust the use of color variables.

Above is a clear example that explains exactly what will change for iOS. There should be no changes on Android.



New colors.
Also, many new colors were added. Most of them are most noticeable on Android. Therefore, the examples below will be shown based on Android, but are relevant for all platforms.

![](/img/docs/tma-design-guidelines/tma-design_2.png)

2. For Mini Apps, the ability to use Telegram header colors has become available.

![](/img/docs/tma-design-guidelines/tma-design_3.png)


3. The token accent_text_color has become available, which is useful for any accent elements in your applications. Previously, everyone used the less suitable dark link_color.

![](/img/docs/tma-design-guidelines/tma-design_4.png)

4. For all secondary cell labels, it's now better to use `subtitle_text_color`. This will allow for more contrasting label, improving the accessibility of your applications.

![](/img/docs/tma-design-guidelines/tma-design_5.png)


5. For section headers of cards, there is now a dedicated token: `section_header_text_color`.

![](/img/docs/tma-design-guidelines/tma-design_6.png)


6. For cells whose pressing will lead to a destructive action, you can now use `destructive_text_color` instead of custom ones.


<p align="center">
    <br />
    <img width="360" src="/img/docs/tma-design-guidelines/tma-design_7.png" alt="" />
    <br />
</p>



7. A reasonable question arises: how should `link_color` and `hint_color` be used now?

I recommend using them as colors for hint sections under the sections, and the link color for such backgrounds as `secondary_bg_color`.


## See Also

* [Original Source](https://telegra.ph/Changes-in-Color-Variables-for-Telegram-Mini-Apps-11-20)

Commit message:

Rework and proofread TMA Tutorials & Examples (#1012)
* Update step-by-step-guide.mdx

* Update app-examples.mdx

* Update design-guidelines.mdx

* Update step-by-step-guide.mdx

* Update app-examples.mdx

* Update design-guidelines.mdx

* Update app-examples.mdx

* Update design-guidelines.mdx

* Update step-by-step-guide.mdx

* Update app-examples.mdx

---------

Co-authored-by: D-Shestak <d.shestak@pixelplex.io>

docs/v3/guidelines/dapps/tma/tutorials/design-guidelines.mdx, after:


# TMA design guidelines

:::info
Starting with version **6.10**, Telegram updated the Mini App color palette by fixing some old colors and adding new ones.

:::

For context, let's look back at the update history.



### Changelog
1. `bg_color` and `secondary_bg_color` have been updated.

![](/img/docs/tma-design-guidelines/tma-design_1.png)


### Reasons for these changes

• These colors were originally intended for page backgrounds, not UI controls.

• To maintain consistency, they have been updated.

• `section_bg_color` was introduced to color the backgrounds of different sections and cards.

To enhance your app’s appearance, adjust how you use color variables.

The example above clearly shows what will change on iOS. There should be no changes on Android.



New colors.
Many new colors have been added with most being noticeable on Android. The examples focus on Android but apply to all platforms.

![](/img/docs/tma-design-guidelines/tma-design_2.png)

2. Telegram header colors has become available for Mini Apps.

![](/img/docs/tma-design-guidelines/tma-design_3.png)


3. accent_text_color is now available for highlighting accent elements in your apps. Previously, everyone used the less suitable dark link_color.

![](/img/docs/tma-design-guidelines/tma-design_4.png)

4. For all secondary cell labels, use `subtitle_text_color` to create more contrast and improve the accessibility.

![](/img/docs/tma-design-guidelines/tma-design_5.png)


5. A new token `section_header_text_color` is now available for section headers of cards.

![](/img/docs/tma-design-guidelines/tma-design_6.png)


6. For cells that trigger a destructive action, use `destructive_text_color` instead of custom color.


<p align="center">
    <br />
    <img width="360" src="/img/docs/tma-design-guidelines/tma-design_7.png" alt="" />
    <br />
</p>



7. A reasonable question arises: how should `link_color` and `hint_color` be used now?

Use `hint_color` for hint sections under different sections. For backgrounds like `secondary_bg_color`, use `link_color`.

## See also

* [Original source](https://telegra.ph/Changes-in-Color-Variables-for-Telegram-Mini-Apps-11-20)
