docs/v3/guidelines/dapps/apis-sdks/api-types.md, before:

# API Types

**High availability blockchain APIs are the core element of secure, convenient and fast development of useful applications on TON.**

- [TON HTTP API](/v3/guidelines/dapps/apis-sdks/ton-http-apis) — API that allows to work with the _indexed blockchain information_.
- [TON ADNL API](/v3/guidelines/dapps/apis-sdks/ton-adnl-apis) — secure API to communicate with TON, based on ADNL protocol.

## Toncenter APIs
- [TON Index](https://toncenter.com/api/v3/) - TON Index collects data from a full node to PostgreSQL database and provides convenient API to an indexed blockchain.
- [toncenter/v2](https://toncenter.com/) - This API enables HTTP access to TON blockchain - getting accounts and wallets information, looking up blocks and transactions, sending messages to the blockchain, calling get methods of smart contracts, and more.

## Third party APIs
- [TONX API](https://docs.tonxapi.com/) - an API specifically designed for seamless Dapp development, enabling easy access to a variety of tools and data.
- [tonapi.io](https://docs.tonconsole.com/tonapi) - fast indexed API which provides basic data about accounts, transactions, blocks, application-specific data about NFT, Auctions, Jettons, TON DNS, Subscriptions. It also provides annotated data on transaction chains.
- [dton.io](https://dton.io/graphql/) - GraphQL API with that can provide data about accounts, transactions and blocks, as well as application-specific data about NFT, Auctions, Jettons and TON DNS.
- [ton-api-v4](https://mainnet-v4.tonhubapi.com) - another lite-api focused on speed via aggressive cashing in CDN.
- [docs.nftscan.com](https://docs.nftscan.com/reference/ton/model/asset-model) - NFT APIs for TON blockchain.
- [everspace.center](https://everspace.center/toncoin) - Simple RPC API for accessing TON Blockchain.


## Additional APIs

### Toncoin rate APIs

* https://docs.tonconsole.com/tonapi/rest-api/rates
* https://coinmarketcap.com/api/documentation/v1/ 
* https://apiguide.coingecko.com/getting-started


### Address Convert APIs


:::info
It is preferable to convert address via local algorithm, read more in the [Addresses](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/addresses) section of documentation.
:::


#### From Friendly to Raw form

/api/v2/unpackAddress

Curl
```curl
curl -X 'GET' \
'https://toncenter.com/api/v2/unpackAddress?address=EQApAj3rEnJJSxEjEHVKrH3QZgto_MQMOmk8l72azaXlY1zB' \
-H 'accept: application/json'
```

Response body
```curl
{
"ok": true,
"result": "0:29023deb1272494b112310754aac7dd0660b68fcc40c3a693c97bd9acda5e563"
}
```

#### From Friendly to Raw form

/api/v2/packAddress

Curl
```curl
curl -X 'GET' \
'https://toncenter.com/api/v2/packAddress?address=0%3A29023deb1272494b112310754aac7dd0660b68fcc40c3a693c97bd9acda5e563' \
-H 'accept: application/json'
```

Response body
```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "result": "EQApAj3rEnJJSxEjEHVKrH3QZgto/MQMOmk8l72azaXlY1zB"
}
```



## See Also
* [TON HTTP API](/v3/guidelines/dapps/apis-sdks/ton-http-apis)
* [List of SDKs](/v3/guidelines/dapps/apis-sdks/sdk)
* [TON Cookbook](/v3/guidelines/dapps/cookbook)

Commit message:

Update TON Documentation to Include TONX API Information Across Multiple Sections (#838)
* Add Testnet TONX Faucet and API URLs to documentation

* Edit TON HTTP API to TONAPI

* Add TONX API to RPC Nodes List

* Add TONX API in Indexer List

* Add TONX API in Other APIs List

* Add TONX.js into TypeScript / JavaScript List

* Add TONX API Link

* Add TONX API into node provide partner List

* Add TONX API into Third party APIs List

* Update API list in documentation

Rearranged the order of third-party APIs listed in the documentation. The TONX API and tonapi.io entries were swapped for better readability. No changes were made to the content or descriptions of these APIs.

* Updated RPC Nodes list in documentation

The RPC Nodes list in the documentation has been updated. The changes include reordering of the items and minor modifications to their descriptions for better clarity and understanding.

* Updated API references in documentation

Rearranged the order of API references in the blockchain connection section of the documentation. The TONX API reference is now listed after suggestions for using a public TON Index or running your own TON Index. No changes were made to the actual content of these references.

* Updated SDK documentation

Reordered the list of libraries in the SDK documentation for better readability. Also, added some spacing to improve visual separation between different sections.

* Updated FAQ documentation

Rearranged the order of node providers partners in the FAQ section of the documentation. No new content was added or removed, just reorganized for better readability and flow.

* Updated testnet documentation

Rearranged the order of resources in the testnet documentation for better readability and logical flow. The Testnet TONAPI link has been moved up for easier access.

docs/v3/guidelines/dapps/apis-sdks/api-types.md, after:

# API Types

**High availability blockchain APIs are the core element of secure, convenient and fast development of useful applications on TON.**

- [TON HTTP API](/v3/guidelines/dapps/apis-sdks/ton-http-apis) — API that allows to work with the _indexed blockchain information_.
- [TON ADNL API](/v3/guidelines/dapps/apis-sdks/ton-adnl-apis) — secure API to communicate with TON, based on ADNL protocol.

## Toncenter APIs
- [TON Index](https://toncenter.com/api/v3/) - TON Index collects data from a full node to PostgreSQL database and provides convenient API to an indexed blockchain.
- [toncenter/v2](https://toncenter.com/) - This API enables HTTP access to TON blockchain - getting accounts and wallets information, looking up blocks and transactions, sending messages to the blockchain, calling get methods of smart contracts, and more.

## Third party APIs
- [tonapi.io](https://docs.tonconsole.com/tonapi) — Fast indexed API providing basic data about accounts, transactions, blocks, and application-specific data about NFTs, Auctions, Jettons, TON DNS, and Subscriptions. It also provides annotated data on transaction chains.
- [TONX API](https://docs.tonxapi.com/reference/build-your-first-dapp) — Your go-to API for accessing data on accounts, transactions, blocks, NFTs, and Jettons with 99.99% uptime—just like TonKey and TonStake did.
- [dton.io](https://dton.io/graphql/) — GraphQL API that can provide data about accounts, transactions, and blocks, as well as application-specific data about NFTs, Auctions, Jettons, and TON DNS.
- [ton-api-v4](https://mainnet-v4.tonhubapi.com) — A lite API focused on speed via aggressive caching in CDN.
- [docs.nftscan.com](https://docs.nftscan.com/reference/ton/model/asset-model) — NFT APIs for the TON blockchain.
- [everspace.center](https://everspace.center/toncoin) — Simple RPC API for accessing the TON blockchain.


## Additional APIs

### Toncoin rate APIs

* https://docs.tonconsole.com/tonapi/rest-api/rates
* https://coinmarketcap.com/api/documentation/v1/ 
* https://apiguide.coingecko.com/getting-started


### Address Convert APIs


:::info
It is preferable to convert address via local algorithm, read more in the [Addresses](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/addresses) section of documentation.
:::


#### From Friendly to Raw form

/api/v2/unpackAddress

Curl
```curl
curl -X 'GET' \
'https://toncenter.com/api/v2/unpackAddress?address=EQApAj3rEnJJSxEjEHVKrH3QZgto_MQMOmk8l72azaXlY1zB' \
-H 'accept: application/json'
```

Response body
```curl
{
"ok": true,
"result": "0:29023deb1272494b112310754aac7dd0660b68fcc40c3a693c97bd9acda5e563"
}
```

#### From Friendly to Raw form

/api/v2/packAddress

Curl
```curl
curl -X 'GET' \
'https://toncenter.com/api/v2/packAddress?address=0%3A29023deb1272494b112310754aac7dd0660b68fcc40c3a693c97bd9acda5e563' \
-H 'accept: application/json'
```

Response body
```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "result": "EQApAj3rEnJJSxEjEHVKrH3QZgto/MQMOmk8l72azaXlY1zB"
}
```



## See Also
* [TON HTTP API](/v3/guidelines/dapps/apis-sdks/ton-http-apis)
* [List of SDKs](/v3/guidelines/dapps/apis-sdks/sdk)
* [TON Cookbook](/v3/guidelines/dapps/cookbook)
