docs/v3/contribute/docs/schemes-guidelines.mdx, before:

import ConceptImage from '@site/src/components/conceptImage';
import ThemedImage from '@theme/ThemedImage';

# Graphic Explanations Guidelines

Maintaining consistency in documentation is crucial, and to achieve this, a specific standard for visualizing processes in smart contracts has been developed.

## Graphic Explanation Notation

### Message Processing Graph

To depict message processing, it's advisable to utilize a graphical representation resembling a smart contract graph, complete with labels for transactions and messages.

If the order of transactions doesn't matter, you can omit their labels. This simplifies the diagram, making it easier to read and understand the details related to messages and contracts.

#### Annotation Primitives

<ThemedImage
  alt=""
  sources={{
    light: '/img/docs/scheme-templates/message-processing-graphs/Graphic-Explanations-Guidelines_1.png?raw=true',
    dark: '/img/docs/scheme-templates/message-processing-graphs/Graphic-Explanations-Guidelines_1_dark.png?raw=true',
  }}
/>
<br></br>

* Avoid using big quantity different and bright colors.
* Use the modification of figures, such as using a dashed border line.
* For better comprehension, different transactions could be displayed with distinct line styles (solid and dashed).


#### Message Processing Example

<br></br>
<ThemedImage
  alt=""
  sources={{
    light: '/img/docs/message-delivery/message_delivery_2.png?raw=true',
    dark: '/img/docs/message-delivery/message_delivery_2_dark.png?raw=true',
  }}
/>
<br></br>



Learn references directly from Visio [message-processing.vsdx](/schemes-visio/message_processing.vsdx).


### Formats and Colors

#### Fonts

* **Inter** fonts family  for all text within diagrams.

#### Colors - Light Mode
* Pencil Hand Drawn(default theme)

#### Colors - Dark Mode
* Font `#e3e3e3`
* Background `#232328`
* Light Highlight(arrows and scheme borders) `#058dd2`
* Dark Highlight(arrows and scheme borders) `#0088cc`
* InnerBackGround(for nested blocks) `#333337`


#### Version Control Policy

* Set diagrams in the documentation by SVG format for schemes to ensure readability on various devices.
* Store original files in the project's Git repository under the "/static/visio" directory, making them easier to modify in the future.


### Sequence Diagram
In the case of complex and repetitive communication schemes between 2-3 actors, it is advisable to use a sequence diagram. For messages, use the notation of a common synchronous message arrow.

#### Example

<br></br>
<div class="text--center">
<ThemedImage
  alt=""
  sources={{
    light: '/img/docs/message-delivery/message_delivery_7.png?raw=true',
    dark: '/img/docs/message-delivery/message_delivery_7_dark.png?raw=true',
  }}
/>
</div>
<br></br>


### Scheme References

* [message-processing.vsdx](/schemes-visio/message_processing.vsdx)

Commit message:

Doc editor guidelines (#947)
* update_contributors_list

* init_commit

* add_sidebar

* add_style_guide_drafts

* fix_typos

* add_linking_policy

* add_contribute_rules

* update_wordlist

* update_cspell

* update_editor_guidelines

* update_content_and_style

* Readme_proofread

* proofread content-standardization.mdx

* Update README.md

* Update content-standardization.mdx

* Proofread content-standardization.mdx

* clarify_contribution_flow

* mark_outdated_page

* typography_proofread

* style-guide.mdx_proofread

* typography_proofread

* maintainers_proofread

* typography_proofread

* content-standardization_proofread

* fix_formatting_and_beauty

docs/v3/contribute/docs/schemes-guidelines.mdx, after:

import ConceptImage from '@site/src/components/conceptImage';
import ThemedImage from '@theme/ThemedImage';

# Graphic Explanations Guidelines

:::danger
This page is outdated and will be deleted soon.
See the [How to contribute](/v3/contribute/).
:::

Maintaining consistency in documentation is crucial, and to achieve this, a specific standard for visualizing processes in smart contracts has been developed.

## Graphic Explanation Notation

### Message Processing Graph

To depict message processing, it's advisable to utilize a graphical representation resembling a smart contract graph, complete with labels for transactions and messages.

If the order of transactions doesn't matter, you can omit their labels. This simplifies the diagram, making it easier to read and understand the details related to messages and contracts.

#### Annotation Primitives

<ThemedImage
  alt=""
  sources={{
    light: '/img/docs/scheme-templates/message-processing-graphs/Graphic-Explanations-Guidelines_1.png?raw=true',
    dark: '/img/docs/scheme-templates/message-processing-graphs/Graphic-Explanations-Guidelines_1_dark.png?raw=true',
  }}
/>
<br></br>

* Avoid using big quantity different and bright colors.
* Use the modification of figures, such as using a dashed border line.
* For better comprehension, different transactions could be displayed with distinct line styles (solid and dashed).


#### Message Processing Example

<br></br>
<ThemedImage
  alt=""
  sources={{
    light: '/img/docs/message-delivery/message_delivery_2.png?raw=true',
    dark: '/img/docs/message-delivery/message_delivery_2_dark.png?raw=true',
  }}
/>
<br></br>



Learn references directly from Visio [message-processing.vsdx](/schemes-visio/message_processing.vsdx).


### Formats and Colors

#### Fonts

* **Inter** fonts family  for all text within diagrams.

#### Colors - Light Mode
* Pencil Hand Drawn(default theme)

#### Colors - Dark Mode
* Font `#e3e3e3`
* Background `#232328`
* Light Highlight(arrows and scheme borders) `#058dd2`
* Dark Highlight(arrows and scheme borders) `#0088cc`
* InnerBackGround(for nested blocks) `#333337`


#### Version Control Policy

* Set diagrams in the documentation by SVG format for schemes to ensure readability on various devices.
* Store original files in the project's Git repository under the "/static/visio" directory, making them easier to modify in the future.


### Sequence Diagram
In the case of complex and repetitive communication schemes between 2-3 actors, it is advisable to use a sequence diagram. For messages, use the notation of a common synchronous message arrow.

#### Example

<br></br>
<div class="text--center">
<ThemedImage
  alt=""
  sources={{
    light: '/img/docs/message-delivery/message_delivery_7.png?raw=true',
    dark: '/img/docs/message-delivery/message_delivery_7_dark.png?raw=true',
  }}
/>
</div>
<br></br>


### Scheme References

* [message-processing.vsdx](/schemes-visio/message_processing.vsdx)
