docs/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/contracts-specs/nominator-pool.mdx, before:

import Feedback from '@site/src/components/Feedback';

# Nominator pool

A Nominator Pool is a smart contract that allows one or more nominators to lend Toncoin for validator staking. It ensures validator funds are used exclusively for validation and guarantees proper reward distribution.

## Architecture

![image](/img/nominator-pool/nominator-pool.png)

## Limits

The pool is designed for large amounts of coins, prioritizing security and code simplicity. It doesn't support small deposits or a large number of nominators. The target configuration is:

- Minimum nominator stake: 10,000 TON
- Maximum nominators per pool: 40 (untested beyond this limit)

## Fees

Operating in the masterchain requires about 5 TON per validation round, paid by the validator. The pool must maintain a minimum balance of 10 TON for network storage fees (non-withdrawable).

## Reward distribution

After each validation round, the pool recovers its stake plus rewards from the elector contract. Rewards are split as follows:

```
validator_reward = (reward * validator_reward_share) / 10000
nominators_reward = reward - validator_reward
```

Nominators receive shares proportional to their stakes. For example, if two nominators are in the pool with stakes of 100k and 300k TON, the first one will take 25% and the second 75% of the `nominators_reward`.

### Slashing

For validation fines:

1. Deduct from validator funds first
2. If insufficient, deduct from nominators proportionally
3. Pool design ensures validator funds always cover the maximum possible fines

## Validator requirements

The pool participates in validation only when:

- Validator funds exceed `min_validator_stake`
- Validator funds cover maximum possible fines (based on network config)

## Nominator's messages

To interact with the nominator pool, nominators send simple messages with a text comment (from any wallet application) to the pool smart contract.
All messages must be sent in **bounceable mode** to prevent fund loss from errors.

### Deposit

Send a message with the comment "d" and amount ≥ `min_nominator_stake + 1 TON`.

Deposits:

- Credit immediately if pool inactive (`state == 0`)
- Queue as `pending_deposit_amount` if pool active
- Reject if `max_nominators_count` reached

### Withdrawal

Send a message with the comment "w" and 1 TON for fees:

- Executes immediately if funds are available
- Queues as `withdraw_request` otherwise
- Full withdrawal only (no partial withdrawals)

## Validator withdraw

The validator can withdraw from the pool all the Toncoins that do not belong to the nominators.

## Key management

Participants must safeguard private keys:

- Lost nominator wallet = lost pool funds
- Lost validator wallet = lost validator funds

:::info
Losing one participant's private key does not impact other participants in the pool.
:::

## Emergency operations

If the validator becomes inactive, any party can send operational messages such as `process withdraw requests`, `update current validator set`, `new_stake`, and `recover_stake` to enable nominator withdrawals. The validator software `mytonctrl` does this automatically.

## Voting for network config proposals

The pool implements weighted voting for network config proposals:

1. Proposals announced via [@tonblockchain](https://t.me/tonblockchain) or [@tonstatus](https://t.me/tonstatus) with HEX hashes like `D855FFBCF813E50E10BEAB902D1177529CE79785CAE913EB96A72AE8EFBCBF47`
2. Nominators vote by sending a message to the nominator pool:
   - `y<HASH>` to support
   - `n<HASH>` to oppose
     > Please attach a small amount of tokens (minimum 1 TON) to this message to cover the network fee. Any unspent TON will be automatically returned to your wallet.
3. Validator submits final vote based on pool consensus
4. Votes expire after 30 days

## Get methods

#### Get-method get_pool_data

Returns complete pool state information as a tuple containing:

1. `state` (uint)  
   Current operational state:  
    `0` = Not validating  
    `1` = Stake request sent  
    `2` = Validation confirmed

2. `nominators_count` (uint)  
   Active nominators count

3. `stake_amount_sent` (nanotons)  
   The current validation stake amount

4. `validator_amount` (nanotons)  
   Validator's owned funds

5. `validator_address` (uint, immutable)  
   Validator wallet address. Convert with `"-1:" + dec_to_hex(validator_address)`.

6. `validator_reward_share` (uint, immutable)  
   Validator's reward percentage. For example 4000 = 40%

```
validator_reward = (reward * validator_reward_share) / 10000
```

7. `max_nominators_count` (uint, immutable)  
   Maximum allowed nominators, typically 40

8. `min_validator_stake` (nanotons, immutable)  
   Minimum validator stake requirement

9. `min_nominator_stake` (nanotons, immutable)  
   Minimum nominator deposit

10. `nominators` (Cell)  
    Raw dictionary of active nominators

11. `withdraw_requests` (Cell)  
    Raw dictionary of pending withdrawals

12. `stake_at` (uint)  
    Next validation round ID, which is supposed to start at [`utime_since`](/v3/documentation/network/configs/blockchain-configs#configuration-parameters-4)

13. `saved_validator_set_hash` (uint)  
    Technical validator info

14. `validator_set_changes_count` (uint)  
    Technical validator info

15. `validator_set_change_time` (uint)  
    Technical validator info

16. `stake_held_for` (uint)  
    Stake lock duration

17. `config_proposal_votings` (Cell)  
    Raw dictionary of active proposal votes

#### Get-method list_nominators

Returns an array of all nominators with their:

1. `address` (uint)  
   BaseChain address. Convert with `"0:" + dec_to_hex(address)`.
2. `amount` (nanotons)  
   Active stake balance
3. `pending_deposit_amount` (nanotons)  
   Queued deposit amount
4. `withdraw_request` (int)  
   `-1` indicates active withdrawal request

#### Get-method get_nominator_data

Returns detailed nominator information for the specified address.

> Address must be in raw format without the `0:` prefix.

1. `amount` (nanotons) - Active stake
2. `pending_deposit_amount` (nanotons) - Queued deposit
3. `withdraw_request` (int) - Withdrawal flag (`-1` if active)

Throws an `86` error if there is no such nominator in the pool.

**Example**:  
For nominator `EQA0i8-CdGnF_DhUHHf92R1ONH6sIA9vLZ_WLcCIhfBBXwtG`:

```bash
get_nominator_data 0x348bcf827469c5fc38541c77fdd91d4e347eac200f6f2d9fd62dc08885f0415f
```


### Voting Methods

#### Get-method list_votes

Returns all active proposals with the following:

1. `proposal_hash` (uint) - Convert with `dec_to_hex()`
2. `votes_create_time` (uint) - Unix timestamp

#### Get-method list_voters

Returns voting details per proposal:

1. `address` (uint)
   - Nominator: `"0:" + dec_to_hex(address)`
   - Validator: `"-1:" + dec_to_hex(address)`
2. `support` (int)
   - `-1` = For
   - `0` = Against
3. `vote_time` (uint) - Unix timestamp

**Note**: Voting results calculated off-chain

## Integration into wallet applications

For deposits, withdrawals, and votes, send simple messages to the pool with the desired text comments as described above. When sending a deposit, you can store the amount in the local storage. When sending a re-deposit, add it to this amount, too.

Call the get method `get_nominator_data(your_address)` and calculate profit as:

```python
current_profit = (amount + pending_deposit_amount) - sent_amount_stored_in_local_storage
```

To obtain the pool's complete state, you need to query both `get_pool_data` and `list_nominators`.

## See also

- [Nominator Pool contract](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/nominator-pool)
- [Usage guide](/v3/guidelines/smart-contracts/howto/nominator-pool)

<Feedback />

Commit message:

Formatting and enhance cost breakdown in Nominator Pool Documention (#1158)
* Fix: Formatting and enhance cost breakdown in Nominator Pool documentation

* Update nominator-pool.mdx

* Update nominator-pool.mdx

docs/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/contracts-specs/nominator-pool.mdx, after:

import Feedback from '@site/src/components/Feedback';

# Nominator pool

A Nominator Pool is a smart contract that allows one or more nominators to lend Toncoin for validator staking. It ensures validator funds are used exclusively for validation and guarantees proper reward distribution.

## Architecture

![image](/img/nominator-pool/nominator-pool.png)

## Limits

The pool is designed for large amounts of coins, prioritizing security and code simplicity. It doesn't support small deposits or a large number of nominators. The target configuration is:

- Minimum nominator stake: 10,000 TON
- Maximum nominators per pool: 40 (untested beyond this limit)

## Fees

In the TON blockchain, the validator cycle is approximately 18 hours, and there are roughly 40.5 validation rounds per month (assuming a 30-day month).

Here's the breakdown of costs based on participation:

- **Participating in only odd or even cycles (half of the rounds):**

  - Rounds per month: ~20.25
  - Cost per round: ~5 Toncoins
  - `total cost = 20.25 * 5 -> ~101.25 Toncoins`

- **Participating in both odd and even cycles (all rounds):**
  - Rounds per month: ~40.5
  - Cost per round : ~ 5 Toncoins
  - `total cost = 40.5 * 5 -> ~202.50 Toncoins`

## Reward distribution

After each validation round, the pool recovers its stake plus rewards from the elector contract. Rewards are split as follows:

```
validator_reward = (reward * validator_reward_share) / 10000
nominators_reward = reward - validator_reward
```

Nominators receive shares proportional to their stakes. For example, if two nominators are in the pool with stakes of 100k and 300k TON, the first one will take 25% and the second 75% of the `nominators_reward`.

### Slashing

For validation fines:

1. Deduct from validator funds first
2. If insufficient, deduct from nominators proportionally
3. Pool design ensures validator funds always cover the maximum possible fines

## Validator requirements

The pool participates in validation only when:

- Validator funds exceed `min_validator_stake`
- Validator funds cover maximum possible fines (based on network config)

## Nominator's messages

To interact with the nominator pool, nominators send simple messages with a text comment (from any wallet application) to the pool smart contract.
All messages must be sent in **bounceable mode** to prevent fund loss from errors.

### Deposit

Send a message with the comment "d" and amount ≥ `min_nominator_stake + 1 TON`.

Deposits:

- Credit immediately if pool inactive (`state == 0`)
- Queue as `pending_deposit_amount` if pool active
- Reject if `max_nominators_count` reached

### Withdrawal

Send a message with the comment "w" and 1 TON for fees:

- Executes immediately if funds are available
- Queues as `withdraw_request` otherwise
- Full withdrawal only (no partial withdrawals)

## Validator withdraw

The validator can withdraw from the pool all the Toncoins that do not belong to the nominators.

## Key management

Participants must safeguard private keys:

- Lost nominator wallet = lost pool funds
- Lost validator wallet = lost validator funds

:::info
Losing one participant's private key does not impact other participants in the pool.
:::

## Emergency operations

If the validator becomes inactive, any party can send operational messages such as `process withdraw requests`, `update current validator set`, `new_stake`, and `recover_stake` to enable nominator withdrawals. The validator software `mytonctrl` does this automatically.

## Voting for network config proposals

The pool implements weighted voting for network config proposals:

1. Proposals announced via [@tonblockchain](https://t.me/tonblockchain) or [@tonstatus](https://t.me/tonstatus) with HEX hashes like `D855FFBCF813E50E10BEAB902D1177529CE79785CAE913EB96A72AE8EFBCBF47`
2. Nominators vote by sending a message to the nominator pool:
   - `y<HASH>` to support
   - `n<HASH>` to oppose
     > Please attach a small amount of tokens (minimum 1 TON) to this message to cover the network fee. Any unspent TON will be automatically returned to your wallet.
3. Validator submits final vote based on pool consensus
4. Votes expire after 30 days

## Get methods

#### Get-method get_pool_data

Returns complete pool state information as a tuple containing:

1. `state` (uint)  
   Current operational state:  
    `0` = Not validating  
    `1` = Stake request sent  
    `2` = Validation confirmed

2. `nominators_count` (uint)  
   Active nominators count

3. `stake_amount_sent` (nanotons)  
   The current validation stake amount

4. `validator_amount` (nanotons)  
   Validator's owned funds

5. `validator_address` (uint, immutable)  
   Validator wallet address. Convert with `"-1:" + dec_to_hex(validator_address)`.

6. `validator_reward_share` (uint, immutable)  
   Validator's reward percentage. For example 4000 = 40%

```
validator_reward = (reward * validator_reward_share) / 10000
```

7. `max_nominators_count` (uint, immutable)  
   Maximum allowed nominators, typically 40

8. `min_validator_stake` (nanotons, immutable)  
   Minimum validator stake requirement

9. `min_nominator_stake` (nanotons, immutable)  
   Minimum nominator deposit

10. `nominators` (Cell)  
    Raw dictionary of active nominators

11. `withdraw_requests` (Cell)  
    Raw dictionary of pending withdrawals

12. `stake_at` (uint)  
    Next validation round ID, which is supposed to start at [`utime_since`](/v3/documentation/network/configs/blockchain-configs#configuration-parameters-4)

13. `saved_validator_set_hash` (uint)  
    Technical validator info

14. `validator_set_changes_count` (uint)  
    Technical validator info

15. `validator_set_change_time` (uint)  
    Technical validator info

16. `stake_held_for` (uint)  
    Stake lock duration

17. `config_proposal_votings` (Cell)  
    Raw dictionary of active proposal votes

#### Get-method list_nominators

Returns an array of all nominators with their:

1. `address` (uint)  
   BaseChain address. Convert with `"0:" + dec_to_hex(address)`.
2. `amount` (nanotons)  
   Active stake balance
3. `pending_deposit_amount` (nanotons)  
   Queued deposit amount
4. `withdraw_request` (int)  
   `-1` indicates active withdrawal request

#### Get-method get_nominator_data

Returns detailed nominator information for the specified address.

> Address must be in raw format without the `0:` prefix.

1. `amount` (nanotons) - Active stake
2. `pending_deposit_amount` (nanotons) - Queued deposit
3. `withdraw_request` (int) - Withdrawal flag (`-1` if active)

Throws an `86` error if there is no such nominator in the pool.

**Example**:  
For nominator `EQA0i8-CdGnF_DhUHHf92R1ONH6sIA9vLZ_WLcCIhfBBXwtG`:

```bash
get_nominator_data 0x348bcf827469c5fc38541c77fdd91d4e347eac200f6f2d9fd62dc08885f0415f
```

### Voting Methods

#### Get-method list_votes

Returns all active proposals with the following:

1. `proposal_hash` (uint) - Convert with `dec_to_hex()`
2. `votes_create_time` (uint) - Unix timestamp

#### Get-method list_voters

Returns voting details per proposal:

1. `address` (uint)
   - Nominator: `"0:" + dec_to_hex(address)`
   - Validator: `"-1:" + dec_to_hex(address)`
2. `support` (int)
   - `-1` = For
   - `0` = Against
3. `vote_time` (uint) - Unix timestamp

**Note**: Voting results calculated off-chain

## Integration into wallet applications

For deposits, withdrawals, and votes, send simple messages to the pool with the desired text comments as described above. When sending a deposit, you can store the amount in the local storage. When sending a re-deposit, add it to this amount, too.

Call the get method `get_nominator_data(your_address)` and calculate profit as:

```python
current_profit = (amount + pending_deposit_amount) - sent_amount_stored_in_local_storage
```

To obtain the pool's complete state, you need to query both `get_pool_data` and `list_nominators`.

## See also

- [Nominator Pool contract](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/nominator-pool)
- [Usage guide](/v3/guidelines/smart-contracts/howto/nominator-pool)

<Feedback />
