docs/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/contracts-specs/precompiled-contracts.md, before:

# Precompiled Contracts
*Precompiled smart contract* is a contract with a C++ implementation in node.
When a validator runs a transaction on such smart contract, it can execute this implementation instead of TVM.
This improves performance and allows to reduce computation fees.

## Config
The list of precompiled contracts is stored in the masterchain config:
```
precompiled_smc#b0 gas_usage:uint64 = PrecompiledSmc;
precompiled_contracts_config#c0 list:(HashmapE 256 PrecompiledSmc) = PrecompiledContractsConfig;
_ PrecompiledContractsConfig = ConfigParam 45;
```

`list:(HashmapE 256 PrecompiledSmc)` is a map `(code_hash -> precomplied_smc)`.
If the code hash of a contract is found in this map then the contract is considered *precompiled*.

## Contract execution
Any transaction on a *precompiled smart contract* (i.e. any contract with code hash found in `ConfigParam 45`) is executed in as follows:
1. Get `gas_usage` from the masterchain config.
2. If the balance is not enough to pay for `gas_usage` gas then the compute phase fails with skip reason `cskip_no_gas`.
3. Code can be executed in two ways:
  1. If the precompiled execution is disabled or the C++ implementation is not available in the current version of the node then TVM runs as usual. Gas limit for TVM is set to the transaction gas limit (1M gas).
  2. If the precompiled implementation is enabled and available then the C++ implementation is executed.
4. Override [compute phase values](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/blob/dd5540d69e25f08a1c63760d3afb033208d9c99b/crypto/block/block.tlb#L308): set `gas_used` to `gas_usage`; set `vm_steps`, `vm_init_state_hash`, `vm_final_state_hash` to zero.
5. Computation fees are based on `gas_usage`, not the actual TVM gas usage.

When precompiled contract is executed in TVM, the 17th element of `c7` is set to `gas_usage` and can be retrieved by `GETPRECOMPILEDGAS` instruction. For non-precompiled contracts this value is `null`.

The execution of precompiled contracts is disabled by default. Run `validator-engine` with `--enable-precompiled-smc` flag to enable it.

Note that both ways to execute a precompiled contract yield the same transaction.
Therefore, validators with and without C++ implementation can safely co-exist in the network.
This allows adding new entries to `ConfigParam 45` without requiring all validators to update node software immediately.

## Available implementations
Hic sunt dracones.

## See Also
- [Governance Contracts](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/contracts-specs/governance)

Commit message:

Rework & proofread smart contract documentation #2 (#1082)
* mid-upd

* Update single-nominator-pool.md

* Update single-nominator-pool.md

* mid-upd2

* final corrections1

* final corrections2

* Update governance.md

* Conv fixes

docs/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/contracts-specs/precompiled-contracts.md, after:

# Precompiled contracts

A _precompiled smart contract_ is a contract with a C++ implementation in the node. When a validator processes a transaction for such a contract, it can execute this native implementation instead of TVM. This improves performance and reduces computation fees.

## Config

The list of precompiled contracts is stored in the masterchain configuration:

```
precompiled_smc#b0 gas_usage:uint64 = PrecompiledSmc;
precompiled_contracts_config#c0 list:(HashmapE 256 PrecompiledSmc) = PrecompiledContractsConfig;
_ PrecompiledContractsConfig = ConfigParam 45;
```

The `list:(HashmapE 256 PrecompiledSmc)` represents a mapping of `(code_hash -> precompiled_smc)`. A contract is considered _precompiled_ if its code hash exists in this map.

## Contract execution

Transactions for precompiled smart contracts (those with code hashes in `ConfigParam 45`) follow this execution flow:

1. Retrieve the `gas_usage` value from the masterchain config
2. If the contract balance cannot cover the `gas_usage` cost, the compute phase fails with `cskip_no_gas`
3. Execution proceeds via one of two paths:
   - **TVM execution**: Used if precompiled execution is disabled or the C++ implementation is unavailable in the node version. TVM runs with a 1M gas limit.
   - **Native execution**: Used when precompiled implementation is both enabled and available, executing the C++ code directly
4. Compute phase values are overridden:
   - `gas_used` set to `gas_usage`
   - `vm_steps`, `vm_init_state_hash`, and `vm_final_state_hash` set to zero
5. Computation fees are calculated based on `gas_usage` rather than actual TVM gas consumption

For precompiled contracts executed in TVM, the 17th element of `c7` contains the `gas_usage` value (accessible via `GETPRECOMPILEDGAS`). Non-precompiled contracts return `null` for this value.

**Note**: Enable precompiled contract execution by running `validator-engine` with the `--enable-precompiled-smc` flag. Both execution methods produce identical transactions, allowing validators with and without C++ implementations to coexist in the network. This enables gradual adoption when adding new entries to `ConfigParam 45`.

## Available implementations

Hic sunt dracones.

## See also

- [Governance contracts](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/contracts-specs/governance)
