docs/v3/concepts/dive-into-ton/ton-blockchain/cells-as-data-storage.md, before:

import ConceptImage from '@site/src/components/conceptImage';
import ThemedImage from '@theme/ThemedImage';

# Cells as data storage

Everything in TON is stored in cells. A cell is a data structure containing:

- up to **1023 bits**  of data (not bytes!)
- up to **4 references** to other cells

Bits and references are not intermixed (they are stored separately). Circular references are forbidden: for any cell, none of its descendant cells can have this original cell as a reference.

Thus, all cells constitute a directed acyclic graph (DAG). Here is a good picture to illustrate:

<br></br>
<ThemedImage
    alt=""
    sources={{
        light: '/img/docs/cells-as-data-storage/dag.png?raw=true',
        dark: '/img/docs/cells-as-data-storage/Cells-as-data-storage_1_dark.png?raw=true',
    }}
/>
<br></br>

## Cell types
Currently, there are 5 types of cells: _ordinary_ and 4 _exotic_.
The exotic types are the following:
* Pruned branch cell
* Library reference cell
* Merkle proof cell
* Merkle update cell

:::tip
For more on exotic cells, see: [**TVM Whitepaper, Section 3**](https://ton.org/tvm.pdf).
:::

## Cell flavors

A cell is an opaque object optimized for compact storage.

In particular, it deduplicates data: if there are several  equivalent sub-cells referenced in different branches, their content is only stored once. However, opaqueness means that a cell cannot be modified or read directly. Thus, there are 2 additional flavors of the cells:
* _Builder_ for partially constructed cells, for which fast operations for appending bitstrings, integers, other cells and, references to other cells can be defined.
* _Slice_ for 'dissected' cells representing either the remainder of a partially parsed cell or a value (subcell) residing inside such a cell and extracted from it via a parsing instruction.

Another special cell flavor is used in TVM:

* _Continuation_  for cells containing opcodes (instructions) for TON Virtual Machine, see [TVM bird's-eye overview](/v3/documentation/tvm/tvm-overview).

## Serialization of data to cells

Any object in TON (message, message queue, block, whole blockchain state, contract code and data) serializes to a cell.

The process of serialization is described by a TL-B scheme: a formal description of how this object can be serialized into _Builder_ or how to parse an object of a given type from the _Slice_.
TL-B for cells is the same as TL or ProtoBuf for byte-streams.

If you want to know more details about cell (de)serialization, you could read [Cell & Bag of Cells](/v3/documentation/data-formats/tlb/cell-boc) article.

## See also

* [TL-B Language](/v3/documentation/data-formats/tlb/tl-b-language)

Commit message:

Concepts proofread and rework 2 patch (#990)
* formatting_update

* rework_cells_page

* Update smart-contract-addresses.md

Proofread and active voice

* fix_grammar

* Update cells-as-data-storage.md

Proofread and active voice.

* style_rework

* ton_connect_snippet_fix

* Update security-measures.md

Proofread and active voice.

* Update ton-networking.md

Proofread and rework.

* rework_sharding_concepts

* Update sharding.md

Proofread and rework.

* Update sharding.md

Clarification and term fixes.

* Update blockchain-services.md

Proofread and rework.

* cut_www_part

* Update blockchain-services.md

Proofread and rework.

* differences_rework

* Update difference-of-blockchains.md

Rework and proofread

* Update tvm-vs-evm.md

Rework

* order_update

* page_structure_rework

* rework_headers

* Update solidity-vs-func.md

Rework, proofread, and active voice refactoring.

* update_style_and_headers

* Update tvm-vs-evm.md

Proofread and active voice.

* concepts_content_rework

* Update educational-resources.mdx

Proofread.

* Update auditors.mdx

Proofread.

docs/v3/concepts/dive-into-ton/ton-blockchain/cells-as-data-storage.md, after:

import ConceptImage from '@site/src/components/conceptImage';
import ThemedImage from '@theme/ThemedImage';

# Cells as data storage

In TON, a **cell** is a built material for the entire blockchain. The cell is a data structure containing:

- up to **1023 bits**  of data
- up to **4 references** to other cells
- cell stores bits and references separated.
- cell forbids circular references: for any cell, none of its descendant cells can reference this original cell.

Thus, all cells constitute a directed acyclic graph (DAG). Here's a good picture to illustrate:

<br></br>
<ThemedImage
    alt=""
    sources={{
        light: '/img/docs/cells-as-data-storage/dag.png?raw=true',
        dark: '/img/docs/cells-as-data-storage/Cells-as-data-storage_1_dark.png?raw=true',
    }}
/>
<br></br>

## Cell types
Currently, there are five types of cells: one ordinary cell and four exotic cells.
The exotic types are the following:
* Pruned branch cell
* Library reference cell
* Merkle proof cell
* Merkle update cell

:::tip
See [**Exotic cells**](https://ton.org/tvm.pdf).
:::

## Cell flavors

A cell is an opaque object optimized for compact storage.

It deduplicates data: it only stores the content of several equivalent sub-cells referenced in different branches once. However, one cannot modify or read a cell directly because of its opaqueness. Thus, there are two additional flavors of the cells:
* **Builder** is a flavor for constructing cells
* **Slice** for a flavor for reading cells 

Another unique cell flavor in TVM:

* **Continuation**  for cells containing opcodes instructions for TON Virtual Machine, see [TVM bird's-eye overview](/v3/documentation/tvm/tvm-overview).

## Serialization of data to cells

Any object in TON, like the message, block, or whole blockchain state, serializes to a cell.

A TL-B scheme describes the serialization process: a formal description of how this object can be serialized into _builder_ or how to parse an object of a given type from the _Slice_.
TL-B for cells is the same as TL or ProtoBuf for byte-streams.

If you want more details about cell serialization and deserialization, read [Cell & Bag of Cells](/v3/documentation/data-formats/tlb/cell-boc) article.

## See also

- [Blockchain of blockchains](docs/v3/concepts/dive-into-ton/ton-blockchain/blockchain-of-blockchains/)
- [TL-B Language](/v3/documentation/data-formats/tlb/tl-b-language)
