docs/v3/concepts/dive-into-ton/ton-blockchain/ton-networking.md, before:

# TON networking

The TON Project uses its own peer-to-peer network protocols.

- **TON Blockchain uses these protocols** to propagate new blocks, send and collect transaction candidates and so on.

  While the networking demands of single-blockchain projects, such as Bitcoin or Ethereum, can be met quite easily (one essentially needs to construct
  a peer-to-peer overlay network and then propagate all new blocks and
  transaction candidates via a [gossip](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gossip_protocol) protocol), whereas multi-blockchain projects, such
  as TON, are much more demanding (e.g. one must be able to
  subscribe to updates of only some shardchains, not necessarily all of them).


- **TON Ecosystem services (e.g. TON Proxy, TON Sites, TON Storage) run on these protocols.**

  Once the more sophisticated network protocols needed
  to support TON Blockchain are in place, it turns out that they can easily
  be used for purposes not necessarily related to the immediate demands of the
blockchain itself, thus providing more possibilities and flexibility for creating
  new services in the TON Ecosystem.

## See also

* [ADNL Protocol](/v3/documentation/network/protocols/adnl/overview/)
* [Overlay Subnetworks](/v3/documentation/network/protocols/overlay/)
* [RLDP Protocol](/v3/documentation/network/protocols/rldp/)
* [TON DHT Service](/v3/documentation/network/protocols/dht/ton-dht/)

Commit message:

Concepts proofread and rework 2 patch (#990)
* formatting_update

* rework_cells_page

* Update smart-contract-addresses.md

Proofread and active voice

* fix_grammar

* Update cells-as-data-storage.md

Proofread and active voice.

* style_rework

* ton_connect_snippet_fix

* Update security-measures.md

Proofread and active voice.

* Update ton-networking.md

Proofread and rework.

* rework_sharding_concepts

* Update sharding.md

Proofread and rework.

* Update sharding.md

Clarification and term fixes.

* Update blockchain-services.md

Proofread and rework.

* cut_www_part

* Update blockchain-services.md

Proofread and rework.

* differences_rework

* Update difference-of-blockchains.md

Rework and proofread

* Update tvm-vs-evm.md

Rework

* order_update

* page_structure_rework

* rework_headers

* Update solidity-vs-func.md

Rework, proofread, and active voice refactoring.

* update_style_and_headers

* Update tvm-vs-evm.md

Proofread and active voice.

* concepts_content_rework

* Update educational-resources.mdx

Proofread.

* Update auditors.mdx

Proofread.

docs/v3/concepts/dive-into-ton/ton-blockchain/ton-networking.md, after:

# TON networking

The TON Ecosystem uses its peer-to-peer network protocols.

- **TON blockchain** uses these protocols to propagate new blocks, send and collect transaction candidates, etc.

  While the networking demands of single-blockchain projects, such as Bitcoin or Ethereum, can be met quite easily: one essentially needs to construct a peer-to-peer overlay network and then propagate all new blocks and transaction candidates via a [gossip](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gossip_protocol) protocol.

Multi-blockchain projects, such as TON, are much more demanding. For example, one must be able to subscribe to updates for only some shardchains, not necessarily all of them.


- **TON Ecosystem services** like TON Proxy, TON Sites, TON Storage, and DApps run on these protocols.

  Once the more sophisticated network protocols are in place to support the TON blockchain. 
  They can easily be used for purposes not necessarily related to the immediate demands of the blockchain itself, thus providing more possibilities and flexibility for creating new services in the TON Ecosystem.

## TON network protocols

* [TON Connect](/v3/guidelines/ton-connect/overview/)
* [ADNL Protocol](/v3/documentation/network/protocols/adnl/overview/)
* [Overlay Subnetworks](/v3/documentation/network/protocols/overlay/)
* [RLDP Protocol](/v3/documentation/network/protocols/rldp/)
* [TON DHT Service](/v3/documentation/network/protocols/dht/ton-dht/)

## See also
- [TON security audits](/v3/concepts/dive-into-ton/ton-blockchain/security-measures/)
