docs/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/getting-started/javascript.mdx, before:

import Feedback from '@site/src/components/Feedback';

import Button from '@site/src/components/button'


# Blueprint SDK

![Blueprint](/img/blueprint/logo.svg)

A development environment for TON for writing, testing, and deploying smart contracts.

## Quick start 🚀

Run the following in terminal to create a new project and follow the on-screen instructions:

```bash
npm create ton@latest
```


<Button href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7omBDfSqGfA&list=PLtUBO1QNEKwtO_zSyLj-axPzc9O9rkmYa" colorType={'secondary'} sizeType={'sm'}>

Watch Video Tutorials

</Button>


### Core features

- Streamlined workflow for building, testing and deploying smart contracts
- Dead simple deployment to mainnet/testnet using your favorite wallet (eg. Tonkeeper)
- Blazing fast testing of multiple smart contracts in an isolated blockchain running in-process

### Tech stack
- Compiling FunC with https://github.com/ton-community/func-js (no cli)
- Testing smart contracts with https://github.com/ton-org/sandbox
- Deploying smart contracts with TON Connect 2.0 compatible wallets or a `ton://` deeplink

### Requirements

- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) with a recent version like v18, verify version with `node -v`
- IDE with TypeScript and FunC support like [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) with the [FunC plugin](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=tonwhales.func-vscode)

## References

### GitHub

- https://github.com/ton-org/blueprint

### Materials

- [Blueprint using on DoraHacks stream](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5ROXVM-Fojo)
- [Create a new project](https://github.com/ton-org/blueprint#create-a-new-project)
- [Develop a new smart contract](https://github.com/ton-org/blueprint#develop-a-new-contract)
- [[YouTube] Func with Blueprint EN](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7omBDfSqGfA&list=PLtUBO1QNEKwtO_zSyLj-axPzc9O9rkmYa) ([RU version](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLyDBPwv9EPsA5vcUM2vzjQOomf264IdUZ))


## See Also

* [Develop Smart Contract Introduction](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/overview)
* [How to work with wallet smart contracts](/v3/guidelines/smart-contracts/howto/wallet)
* [SDKs](/v3/guidelines/dapps/apis-sdks/sdk)


<Feedback />

Commit message:

feat(tact): IDE plugins and Blueprint descriptions

docs/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/getting-started/javascript.mdx, after:

import Feedback from '@site/src/components/Feedback';

import Button from '@site/src/components/button'


# Blueprint SDK

![Blueprint](/img/blueprint/logo.svg)

A development environment for TON for writing, testing, and deploying smart contracts.

## Quick start 🚀

Run the following in terminal to create a new project and follow the on-screen instructions:

```bash
npm create ton@latest
```


<Button href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7omBDfSqGfA&list=PLtUBO1QNEKwtO_zSyLj-axPzc9O9rkmYa" colorType={'secondary'} sizeType={'sm'}>

Watch Video Tutorials

</Button>


### Core features

- Streamlined workflow for building, testing and deploying smart contracts
- Dead simple deployment to mainnet/testnet using your favorite wallet (eg. Tonkeeper)
- Blazing fast testing of multiple smart contracts in an isolated blockchain running in-process

### Tech stack
- Compiling FunC with https://github.com/ton-community/func-js (no cli)
- Compiling Tact with https://github.com/tact-lang/tact
- Testing smart contracts with https://github.com/ton-org/sandbox
- Deploying smart contracts with TON Connect 2.0 compatible wallets or a `ton://` deeplink

### Requirements

- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) with a recent version like v18, verify version with `node -v`
- IDE with TypeScript and TON support:
  - [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) with the [FunC plugin](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=tonwhales.func-vscode) or [Tact plugin](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=tonstudio.vscode-tact)
  - [IntelliJ IDEA](https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/) with the [TON Development plugin](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/23382-ton)

## References

### GitHub

- https://github.com/ton-org/blueprint

### Materials

- [Blueprint using on DoraHacks stream](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5ROXVM-Fojo)
- [Create a new project](https://github.com/ton-org/blueprint#create-a-new-project)
- [Develop a new smart contract](https://github.com/ton-org/blueprint#develop-a-new-contract)
- [[YouTube] Func with Blueprint EN](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7omBDfSqGfA&list=PLtUBO1QNEKwtO_zSyLj-axPzc9O9rkmYa) ([RU version](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLyDBPwv9EPsA5vcUM2vzjQOomf264IdUZ))


## See Also

* [Develop Smart Contract Introduction](/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/overview)
* [How to work with wallet smart contracts](/v3/guidelines/smart-contracts/howto/wallet)
* [SDKs](/v3/guidelines/dapps/apis-sdks/sdk)


<Feedback />
