docs/develop/howto/faq.md, before:

# Frequently Asked Questions

This section covers the most popular questions about TON Blockchain.

## Overview

### Could you share a brief overview of TON?

- [Introduction to The Open Network](/learn/introduction)
- [The TON Blockchain is based on PoS consensus](https://blog.ton.org/the-ton-blockchain-is-based-on-pos-consensus)
- [TON Whitepapers](/learn/docs)

### What are some of the main similarities and differences to EVM blockchains?

- [Ethereum to TON](/learn/introduction#ethereum-to-ton)
- [Comparison of TON, Solana and Ethereum 2.0](https://ton.org/comparison_of_blockchains.pdf)


### Does TON have a test environment?

- [Testnet](/develop/smart-contracts/environment/testnet)

## Block

### What is the RPC method used to retrieve block information?

Blocks produced by Validators. Existing blocks available via Liteservers. Liteservers accessible via Lite Сlients. On top of Lite Сlient built 3rd-party tools like wallets, explorers, dapps, etc.

- To access the Lite Client core check out this section of our GitHub:  [ton-blockchain/tonlib](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/tree/master/tonlib)


Additionally, here are three high-level third-party block explorers:
- https://explorer.toncoin.org/last
- https://toncenter.com/
- https://tonwhales.com/explorer

Read more in the [Explorers in TON](/participate/explorers) section of our documentation.

### Block time

_2-5s_

:::info
Compare TON's on-chain metrics, including block time and time-to-finality, to Solana and Ethereum by reading our analysis at [ton.org/analysis](https://ton.org/analysis).
:::

### Time-to-finality

_Under 6 sec._

:::info
Compare TON's on-chain metrics, including block time and time-to-finality, to Solana and Ethereum by reading our analysis at [ton.org/analysis](https://ton.org/analysis).
:::

### Average block size

```bash 
max block size param 29
max_block_bytes:2097152
```

:::info
Find more actual params in [Network Configs](/develop/howto/network-configs).
:::

### What is the layout of blocks on TON?

- [Block layout](https://docs.ton.org/tblkch.pdf#page=96&zoom=100,148,172), TON Blockchain, p.96

## Transactions

### RPC method to get transactions data

- [see answer above](/develop/howto/faq#are-there-any-standardized-protocols-for-minting-burning-and-transferring-fungible-and-non-fungible-tokens-in-transactions)

### Is TON transaction asynchronous or synchronous? Is it possible to access documentation that show how this system works?

TON Blockchain messages asynchronous:
- sender prepares the transaction body(message boc) and broadcasts it via Lite Client (or higher-level tool)
- Lite Client returns status of broadcast, not result of executing the Transaction
- sender checks desired result by listening target account(address) state or the whole blockchain state

An explanation of how TON asynchronous messaging works is explained using an example related to Wallet smart contracts:
- [How TON wallets work and how to access them using JavaScript](https://blog.ton.org/how-ton-wallets-work-and-how-to-access-them-from-javascript#1b-sending-a-transfer)

Example for Wallet contract transfer (low-level):
- https://github.com/xssnick/tonutils-go/blob/master/example/wallet/main.go

### Is it possible to determine if a transaction is 100% finalized? Is querying the transaction level data sufficient to obtain this information?

**Short answer:** To ensure the transaction is finalized, the receiver's account must be checked.

To learn more about transaction verification, please see the following examples:
- Go: [Wallet example](https://github.com/xssnick/tonutils-go/blob/master/example/wallet/main.go)
- Python: [Storefront bot with payments in TON](/develop/dapps/tutorials/accept-payments-in-a-telegram-bot)
- JavaScript: [Bot being used for dumpling sales](/develop/dapps/tutorials/accept-payments-in-a-telegram-bot-js)

### What is the layout of a transaction in TON?

Fundamentals:
For more info on TON transaction fundamentals please see [page 75 of TON Whitepaper](https://ton.org/docs/tblkch.pdf#page=75&zoom=100,148,290):


Example from explorers (transfer tx):
- https://tonscan.org/tx/FiR7bn5LuBO0FYjx7Fst9kuwnXs128NVFA9YYniKG-A=
- https://ton.cx/tx/33513508000001:FiR7bn5LuBO0FYjx7Fst9kuwnXs128NVFA9YYniKG+A=:EQBfAN7LfaUYgXZNw5Wc7GBgkEX2yhuJ5ka95J1JJwXXf4a8

### Is transaction batching possible?

Yes, transaction batching on TON can be accomplished in two distinct ways:
- By utilizing the asynchronous nature of TON, i.e. sending independent transactions to the network
- By making use of smart contracts which receive task and execute it as a batch

Example of using batch-featured contract (high-load wallet):
- https://github.com/tonuniverse/highload-wallet-api

## Standards

### What accuracy of currencies is available for TON?

_9 digits_

:::info
Number of decimal places supported by Mainnet : 9 digits.
:::

### Are there any standardized protocols for minting, burning, and transferring fungible and non-fungible tokens in transactions?

Non-fungible tokens (NFTs):
- [TEP-62: NFT standard](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0062-nft-standard.md)
- [NFT documentation](/develop/dapps/defi/tokens#nft)

Jettons (tokens):
- [TEP-74: Jettons standard](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md)
- [Distributed tokens overview](https://telegra.ph/Scalable-DeFi-in-TON-03-30)
- [Fungible token documentation(Jettons)](/develop/dapps/defi/tokens#jettons)

Other Standards:
- https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs

### Are there examples of parsing events with Jettons(Tokens) and NFT?

On TON, all data is transmitted as boc-messages. This means that using NFTs in transactions is not an exceptional event. Rather, it is a regular message that is sent to or received from a (NFT- or Wallet-)contract, much like a transaction involving a standard wallet.

However, certain indexed APIs allow you to view all messages sent to or from a contract, and filter them based on your specific requirements.

- https://tonapi.io/swagger-ui

To better understand how this process works, please refer [Payments Processing](/develop/dapps/asset-processing/) section.


## Account Structure

### What is the address format?

- [Smart Contract Address](/learn/overviews/addresses)

### Is it possible to have a named account similar to ENS

Yes, use TON DNS:
- [What is TON DNS?](/learn/services/dns)

### How to distinguish between a normal account and a smart contract?

- [Everything is a smart contract](/learn/overviews/addresses#everything-is-a-smart-contract)

### How to tell if the address is a token address?

For a **Jettons** contract must implement [standard's interface](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md) and return data on _get_wallet_data()_ or _get_jetton_data()_ methods.

### Are there any special accounts (e.g. accounts owned by the network) that have different rules or methods from the rest?

There is a special master blockchain inside a TON called Masterchain. It consists of network-wide contracts with network configuration, validator-related contracts, etc:

:::info
Read more about masterchain, workchains and shardchains in TON Blockchain overview article: [Blockchain of Blockchains](/learn/overviews/ton-blockchain).
:::

Good example is smart governance contract, which is a part of masterchain:
- [Governance contracts](/develop/smart-contracts/governance)

## Smart Contracts

### Is it possible to detect contract deployment events on TON?

[Everything in TON is a smart contract](/learn/overviews/addresses#everything-is-a-smart-contract).

Account address generated from _private key_, _contract code_, and it's _initial state_.
If any component changed - address changed accordingly. Smart contract code itself can be sent to the network later.

Deployment of smart contract means Smart Contract's code is delivered to Blockchain Nodes, and linked on its(smart contract's) address. We need to check contracts deployed by act with code, for example, we can use it's get method or check its Address via Blockchain Explorer.

To protect sending messages to non-existing contracts TON use "bounce" feature. Read more in these articles:

- [Deploying wallet via TonLib](https://ton.org/docs/develop/dapps/asset-processing/#deploying-wallet)
- [Paying for processing queries and sending responses](https://ton.org/docs/develop/smart-contracts/guidelines/processing)
- [Tips & Tricks: bounce TON back](https://ton.org/docs/develop/smart-contracts/guidelines/tips)

### Is it possible to re-deploy code to an existing address or does it have to be deployed as a new contract?

Yes, this is possible. If a smart contract carries out specific instructions(set_code()) its code can be updated and the address will remain the same.

:::info
It is also possible to deploy numerous contracts that are integrated with different addresses using the same **private key**.
:::

### Are smart contract addresses case sensitive?

Yes, smart contract addresses are case sensitive because they are generated using the [base64 algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Base64).  You can learn more about smart contract addresses [here](/learn/overviews/addresses).

## Remote Procedure Calls (RPCs)

### Recommended node providers for data extraction include:

API types:
- Read more about different [API Types](/develop/dapps/apis/) (Indexed, HTTP, and ADNL)

Node providers partners:

- https://toncenter.com/api/v2/
- [getblock.io](https://getblock.io/)
- https://www.orbs.com/ton-access/
- [toncenter/ton-http-api](https://github.com/toncenter/ton-http-api) 
- [nownodes.io](https://nownodes.io/nodes)

TON directory with projects from TON Community:

- [ton.app](https://ton.app/)

###  Provided below are two main resources used to obtain information related to public node endpoints on TON Blockchain (for both TON Mainnet and TON Testnet).

- [Network Configs](/develop/howto/network-configs)
- [Examples and tutorials](/develop/dapps/#examples)

Commit message:

dev-smart-contract-inrto_proofread

docs/develop/howto/faq.md, after:

# Frequently Asked Questions

This section covers the most popular questions about TON Blockchain.

## Overview

### Could you share a brief overview of TON?

- [Introduction to The Open Network](/learn/introduction)
- [The TON Blockchain is based on PoS consensus](https://blog.ton.org/the-ton-blockchain-is-based-on-pos-consensus)
- [TON Whitepapers](/learn/docs)

### What are some of the main similarities and differences to EVM blockchains?

- [Ethereum to TON](/learn/introduction#ethereum-to-ton)
- [Comparison of TON, Solana and Ethereum 2.0](https://ton.org/comparison_of_blockchains.pdf)


### Does TON have a test environment?

- [Testnet](/develop/smart-contracts/environment/testnet)

## Block

### What is the RPC method used to retrieve block information?

Blocks produced by Validators. Existing blocks available via Liteservers. Liteservers accessible via Lite Сlients. On top of Lite Сlient built 3rd-party tools like wallets, explorers, dapps, etc.

- To access the Lite Client core check out this section of our GitHub:  [ton-blockchain/tonlib](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/tree/master/tonlib)


Additionally, here are three high-level third-party block explorers:
- https://explorer.toncoin.org/last
- https://toncenter.com/
- https://tonwhales.com/explorer

Read more in the [Explorers in TON](/participate/explorers) section of our documentation.

### Block time

_2-5s_

:::info
Compare TON's on-chain metrics, including block time and time-to-finality, to Solana and Ethereum by reading our analysis at [ton.org/analysis](https://ton.org/analysis).
:::

### Time-to-finality

_Under 6 sec._

:::info
Compare TON's on-chain metrics, including block time and time-to-finality, to Solana and Ethereum by reading our analysis at [ton.org/analysis](https://ton.org/analysis).
:::

### Average block size

```bash 
max block size param 29
max_block_bytes:2097152
```

:::info
Find more actual params in [Network Configs](/develop/howto/network-configs).
:::

### What is the layout of blocks on TON?

- [Block layout](https://docs.ton.org/tblkch.pdf#page=96&zoom=100,148,172), TON Blockchain, p.96

## Transactions

### RPC method to get transactions data

- [see answer above](/develop/howto/faq#are-there-any-standardized-protocols-for-minting-burning-and-transferring-fungible-and-non-fungible-tokens-in-transactions)

### Is TON transaction asynchronous or synchronous? Is it possible to access documentation that show how this system works?

TON Blockchain messages asynchronous:
- sender prepares the transaction body(message boc) and broadcasts it via Lite Client (or higher-level tool)
- Lite Client returns status of broadcast, not result of executing the Transaction
- sender checks desired result by listening target account(address) state or the whole blockchain state

An explanation of how TON asynchronous messaging works is explained using an example related to Wallet smart contracts:
- [How TON wallets work and how to access them using JavaScript](https://blog.ton.org/how-ton-wallets-work-and-how-to-access-them-from-javascript#1b-sending-a-transfer)

Example for Wallet contract transfer (low-level):
- https://github.com/xssnick/tonutils-go/blob/master/example/wallet/main.go

### Is it possible to determine if a transaction is 100% finalized? Is querying the transaction level data sufficient to obtain this information?

**Short answer:** To ensure the transaction is finalized, the receiver's account must be checked.

To learn more about transaction verification, please see the following examples:
- Go: [Wallet example](https://github.com/xssnick/tonutils-go/blob/master/example/wallet/main.go)
- Python: [Storefront bot with payments in TON](/develop/dapps/tutorials/accept-payments-in-a-telegram-bot)
- JavaScript: [Bot being used for dumpling sales](/develop/dapps/tutorials/accept-payments-in-a-telegram-bot-js)

### What is the layout of a transaction in TON?

Fundamentals:
For more info on TON transaction fundamentals please see [page 75 of TON Whitepaper](https://ton.org/docs/tblkch.pdf#page=75&zoom=100,148,290):


Example from explorers (transfer tx):
- https://tonscan.org/tx/FiR7bn5LuBO0FYjx7Fst9kuwnXs128NVFA9YYniKG-A=
- https://ton.cx/tx/33513508000001:FiR7bn5LuBO0FYjx7Fst9kuwnXs128NVFA9YYniKG+A=:EQBfAN7LfaUYgXZNw5Wc7GBgkEX2yhuJ5ka95J1JJwXXf4a8

### Is transaction batching possible?

Yes, transaction batching on TON can be accomplished in two distinct ways:
- By utilizing the asynchronous nature of TON, i.e. sending independent transactions to the network
- By making use of smart contracts which receive task and execute it as a batch

Example of using batch-featured contract (high-load wallet):
- https://github.com/tonuniverse/highload-wallet-api

## Standards

### What accuracy of currencies is available for TON?

_9 digits_

:::info
Number of decimal places supported by Mainnet : 9 digits.
:::

### Are there any standardized protocols for minting, burning, and transferring fungible and non-fungible tokens in transactions?

Non-fungible tokens (NFTs):
- [TEP-62: NFT standard](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0062-nft-standard.md)
- [NFT documentation](/develop/dapps/defi/tokens#nft)

Jettons (tokens):
- [TEP-74: Jettons standard](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md)
- [Distributed tokens overview](https://telegra.ph/Scalable-DeFi-in-TON-03-30)
- [Fungible token documentation(Jettons)](/develop/dapps/defi/tokens#jettons)

Other Standards:
- https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs

### Are there examples of parsing events with Jettons(Tokens) and NFT?

On TON, all data is transmitted as boc-messages. This means that using NFTs in transactions is not an exceptional event. Rather, it is a regular message that is sent to or received from a (NFT- or Wallet-)contract, much like a transaction involving a standard wallet.

However, certain indexed APIs allow you to view all messages sent to or from a contract, and filter them based on your specific requirements.

- https://tonapi.io/swagger-ui

To better understand how this process works, please refer [Payments Processing](/develop/dapps/asset-processing/) section.


## Account Structure

### What is the address format?

- [Smart Contract Address](/learn/overviews/addresses)

### Is it possible to have a named account similar to ENS

Yes, use TON DNS:
- [What is TON DNS?](/learn/services/dns)

### How to distinguish between a normal account and a smart contract?

- [Everything is a smart contract](/learn/overviews/addresses#everything-is-a-smart-contract)

### How to tell if the address is a token address?

For a **Jettons** contract must implement [standard's interface](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md) and return data on _get_wallet_data()_ or _get_jetton_data()_ methods.

### Are there any special accounts (e.g. accounts owned by the network) that have different rules or methods from the rest?

There is a special master blockchain inside a TON called Masterchain. It consists of network-wide contracts with network configuration, validator-related contracts, etc:

:::info
Read more about masterchain, workchains and shardchains in TON Blockchain overview article: [Blockchain of Blockchains](/learn/overviews/ton-blockchain).
:::

Good example is smart governance contract, which is a part of masterchain:
- [Governance contracts](/develop/smart-contracts/governance)

## Smart Contracts

### Is it possible to detect contract deployment events on TON?

[Everything in TON is a smart contract](/learn/overviews/addresses#everything-is-a-smart-contract).

Account address generated from _private key_, _contract code_, and it's _initial state_.
If any component changed - address changed accordingly. Smart contract code itself can be sent to the network later.

Deployment of smart contract means Smart Contract's code is delivered to Blockchain Nodes, and linked on its(smart contract's) address. We need to check contracts deployed by act with code, for example, we can use it's get method or check its Address via Blockchain Explorer.

To protect sending messages to non-existing contracts TON use "bounce" feature. Read more in these articles:

- [Deploying wallet via TonLib](https://ton.org/docs/develop/dapps/asset-processing/#deploying-wallet)
- [Paying for processing queries and sending responses](https://ton.org/docs/develop/smart-contracts/guidelines/processing)
- [Tips & Tricks: bounce TON back](https://ton.org/docs/develop/smart-contracts/guidelines/tips)

### Is it possible to re-deploy code to an existing address or does it have to be deployed as a new contract?

Yes, this is possible. If a smart contract carries out specific instructions(set_code()) its code can be updated and the address will remain the same.

:::info
It is also possible to deploy numerous contracts that are integrated with different addresses using the same **private key**.
:::

### Are smart contract addresses case sensitive?

Yes, smart contract addresses are case sensitive because they are generated using the [base64 algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Base64).  You can learn more about smart contract addresses [here](/learn/overviews/addresses).


### Is the Ton Virtual Machine (TVM) EVM-compatible?

  The TVM is not compatible with the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) because TON leverages a completely different architecture (TON is asynchronous, while Ethereum is synchronous).

  [Read more on asynchronous smart contracts](https://telegra.ph/Its-time-to-try-something-new-Asynchronous-smart-contracts-03-25).

### Is it possible to write on Solidity for TON?

  Relatedly, the TON ecosystem does not support development in Ethereum’s Solidity programming language.

  But if you add asynchronous messages to the Solidity syntax and the ability to interact with data at a low level, then you get FunC. FunC features a syntax that is common to most modern programming languages and is designed specifically for development on TON.


## Remote Procedure Calls (RPCs)

### Recommended node providers for data extraction include:

API types:
- Read more about different [API Types](/develop/dapps/apis/) (Indexed, HTTP, and ADNL)

Node providers partners:

- https://toncenter.com/api/v2/
- [getblock.io](https://getblock.io/)
- https://www.orbs.com/ton-access/
- [toncenter/ton-http-api](https://github.com/toncenter/ton-http-api) 
- [nownodes.io](https://nownodes.io/nodes)

TON directory with projects from TON Community:

- [ton.app](https://ton.app/)

###  Provided below are two main resources used to obtain information related to public node endpoints on TON Blockchain (for both TON Mainnet and TON Testnet).

- [Network Configs](/develop/howto/network-configs)
- [Examples and tutorials](/develop/dapps/#examples)
