docs/develop/smart-contracts/fee-calculation.md, before:

# Fees Calculation

When your contract starts processing an incoming message, you should check the amount of TONs attached to the message to ensure they are enough to cover [all types of fees](/develop/smart-contracts/fees#elements-of-transaction-fee). To do this, you need to calculate (or predict) the fee for the current transaction.

This document describes how to calculate fees in FunC contracts using the new TVM opcodes.

:::info More information on opcodes
For a comprehensive list of TVM opcodes, including those mentioned below, check the [TVM instruction page](/learn/tvm-instructions/instructions).
:::

:::info
Most functions with the opcodes described below are presented in the [stdlib](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/blob/master/crypto/smartcont/stdlib.fc) library. If your contract use previous version of stdlib.fc, you can add functions with required opcodes manually.
:::

## Storage Fee

### Overview

In brief, `storage fees` are the amounts you pay for storing a smart contract on the blockchain. You pay for every second the smart contract is stored on the blockchain.

Use the `GETSTORAGEFEE` opcode with the following parameters:

| Param name | Description                                         |
|:-----------|:----------------------------------------------------|
| cells      | Number of message cells                             |
| bits       | Number of message bits                              |
| is_mc      | True if the source or destination is in the masterchain |

### Calculation Flow

Each contract has its balance. You can calculate how many TONs your contract requires to remain valid for a specified `seconds` time using the function **presented in the [stdlib](/ton-blockchain/ton/blob/master/crypto/smartcont/stdlib.fc) library**:

```func
int get_storage_fee(int workchain, int seconds, int bits, int cells) asm(cells bits seconds workchain) "GETSTORAGEFEE";
```

You can then hardcode that value into the contract and calculate the current storage fee using:

```func
int calculate_storage_fee(int balance, int msg_value, int workchain, int seconds, int bits, int cells) inline {
    int balance_before_message = balance - msg_value;
    int storage_fee_for_whole_period = get_storage_fee(workchain, seconds, bits, cells);
    int storage_fee = storage_fee_for_whole_period - min(balance_before_message, storage_fee_for_whole_period);
}
```

This way, you can check if the contract has enough balance to be stored for the `seconds` time before the next message arrives.

## Computation Fee

### Overview

In most cases use the `GETGASFEE` opcode with the following parameters:

| Param      | Description                                             |
|:-----------|:--------------------------------------------------------|
| `gas_used` | Gas amount, calculated in tests and hardcoded           |
| `is_mc`    | True if the source or destination is in the masterchain |

### Calculation Flow

```func
int get_compute_fee(int workchain, int gas_used) asm(gas_used workchain) "GETGASFEE";
```

But how do you get `gas_used`? Through tests!

To calculate `gas_used`, you should write a test for your contract that:

1. Makes a transfer.
2. Checks if it's successful and retrieves the transfer info.
3. Checks the actual amount of gas used by that transfer for computation.

```ts
// Just Init code
const deployerJettonWallet = await userWallet(deployer.address);
let initialJettonBalance = await deployerJettonWallet.getJettonBalance();
const notDeployerJettonWallet = await userWallet(notDeployer.address);
let initialJettonBalance2 = await notDeployerJettonWallet.getJettonBalance();
let sentAmount = toNano('0.5');
let forwardAmount = toNano('0.05');
let forwardPayload = beginCell().storeUint(0x1234567890abcdefn, 128).endCell();
// Make sure payload is different, so cell load is charged for each individual payload.
let customPayload = beginCell().storeUint(0xfedcba0987654321n, 128).endCell();

// Let's use this case for fees calculation
// Put the forward payload into custom payload, to make sure maximum possible gas is used during computation
const sendResult = await deployerJettonWallet.sendTransfer(deployer.getSender(), toNano('0.17'), // tons
    sentAmount, notDeployer.address,
    deployer.address, customPayload, forwardAmount, forwardPayload);
expect(sendResult.transactions).toHaveTransaction({ //excesses
    from: notDeployerJettonWallet.address,
    to: deployer.address,
});
/*
transfer_notification#7362d09c query_id:uint64 amount:(VarUInteger 16)
                              sender:MsgAddress forward_payload:(Either Cell ^Cell)
                              = InternalMsgBody;
*/
expect(sendResult.transactions).toHaveTransaction({ // notification
    from: notDeployerJettonWallet.address,
    to: notDeployer.address,
    value: forwardAmount,
    body: beginCell().storeUint(Op.transfer_notification, 32).storeUint(0, 64) // default queryId
        .storeCoins(sentAmount)
        .storeAddress(deployer.address)
        .storeUint(1, 1)
        .storeRef(forwardPayload)
        .endCell()
});
const transferTx = findTransactionRequired(sendResult.transactions, {
    on: deployerJettonWallet.address,
    from: deployer.address,
    op: Op.transfer,
    success: true
});

let computedGeneric: (transaction: Transaction) => TransactionComputeVm;
computedGeneric = (transaction) => {
  if(transaction.description.type !== "generic")
    throw("Expected generic transactionaction");
  if(transaction.description.computePhase.type !== "vm")
    throw("Compute phase expected")
  return transaction.description.computePhase;
}

let printTxGasStats: (name: string, trans: Transaction) => bigint;
printTxGasStats = (name, transaction) => {
    const txComputed = computedGeneric(transaction);
    console.log(`${name} used ${txComputed.gasUsed} gas`);
    console.log(`${name} gas cost: ${txComputed.gasFees}`);
    return txComputed.gasFees;
}

send_gas_fee = printTxGasStats("Jetton transfer", transferTx);
```

## Forward Fee

### Overview

The forward fee is taken for outgoing messages.

Generally, there are three cases of forward fee processing:

1. The message structure is deterministic and you can predict the fee.
2. The message structure depends a lot on the incoming message structure.
3. You can't predict the outgoing message structure at all.

### Calculation Flow

If the message structure is deterministic, use the `GETFORWARDFEE` opcode with the following parameters:

| Param name | Description                                                                               |
|:-----------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| cells      | Number of cells, read more [here](/develop/howto/fees-low-level#in_fwd_fees-out_fwd_fees) |
| bits       | Number of bits, read more [here](/develop/howto/fees-low-level#in_fwd_fees-out_fwd_fees)  |
| is_mc      | True if the source or destination is in the masterchain                                   |

However, sometimes the outgoing message depends significantly on the incoming structure, and in that case, you can't fully predict the fee. Try to use the `GETORIGINALFWDFEE` opcode with the following parameters:

| Param name | Description                                         |
|:-----------|:----------------------------------------------------|
| fwd_fee    | Parsed from the incoming message                    |
| is_mc      | True if the source or destination is in the masterchain |

If even `GETORIGINALFWDFEE` can't be used, there is one more option. **It is the least optimal way but better than not checking**. Use the `SENDMSG` opcode with the following parameters:

| Param name | Description  |
|:-----------|:-------------|
| cells      | Number of cells |
| mode       | Message mode |

It creates an output action and returns a fee for creating a message. However, it uses an unpredictable amount of gas, which can't be calculated using formulas, so how can it be calculated? Use `GASCONSUMED`:

```func
int send_message(cell msg, int mode) impure asm "SENDMSG";
int gas_consumed() asm "GASCONSUMED";
;; ... some code ...

() calculate_forward_fee(cell msg, int mode) inline {
  int gas_before = gas_consumed();
  int forward_fee = send_message(msg, mode);
  int gas_usage = gas_consumed() - gas_before;
  
  ;; forward fee -- fee value
  ;; gas_usage -- amount of gas, used to send msg
}
```

## See Also
- [Stablecoin contract with fees calculation](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/stablecoin-contract)

Commit message:

add row about contract's computation cost depending on input data

docs/develop/smart-contracts/fee-calculation.md, after:

# Fees Calculation

When your contract starts processing an incoming message, you should check the amount of TONs attached to the message to ensure they are enough to cover [all types of fees](/develop/smart-contracts/fees#elements-of-transaction-fee). To do this, you need to calculate (or predict) the fee for the current transaction.

This document describes how to calculate fees in FunC contracts using the new TVM opcodes.

:::info More information on opcodes
For a comprehensive list of TVM opcodes, including those mentioned below, check the [TVM instruction page](/learn/tvm-instructions/instructions).
:::

:::info
Almost all FunC functions used in this article are defined in [stablecoin stdlib.fc contract](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/stablecoin-contract). Actually, stdlib.fc with new opcodes is currently **under development** and **not yet presented on the mainnet repos**, but you can use `stdlib.fc` from [stablecoin](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton) source code as reference.
:::

## Storage Fee

### Overview

In brief, `storage fees` are the amounts you pay for storing a smart contract on the blockchain. You pay for every second the smart contract is stored on the blockchain.

Use the `GETSTORAGEFEE` opcode with the following parameters:

| Param name | Description                                         |
|:-----------|:----------------------------------------------------|
| cells      | Number of message cells                             |
| bits       | Number of message bits                              |
| is_mc      | True if the source or destination is in the masterchain |

### Calculation Flow

Each contract has its balance. You can calculate how many TONs your contract requires to remain valid for a specified `seconds` time using the function **presented in the [stdlib](/ton-blockchain/ton/blob/master/crypto/smartcont/stdlib.fc) library**:

```func
int get_storage_fee(int workchain, int seconds, int bits, int cells) asm(cells bits seconds workchain) "GETSTORAGEFEE";
```

You can then hardcode that value into the contract and calculate the current storage fee using:

```func
int calculate_storage_fee(int balance, int msg_value, int workchain, int seconds, int bits, int cells) inline {
    int balance_before_message = balance - msg_value;
    int storage_fee_for_whole_period = get_storage_fee(workchain, seconds, bits, cells);
    int storage_fee = storage_fee_for_whole_period - min(balance_before_message, storage_fee_for_whole_period);
}
```

This way, you can check if the contract has enough balance to be stored for the `seconds` time before the next message arrives.

## Computation Fee

### Overview

In most cases use the `GETGASFEE` opcode with the following parameters:

| Param      | Description                                             |
|:-----------|:--------------------------------------------------------|
| `gas_used` | Gas amount, calculated in tests and hardcoded           |
| `is_mc`    | True if the source or destination is in the masterchain |

### Calculation Flow

```func
int get_compute_fee(int workchain, int gas_used) asm(gas_used workchain) "GETGASFEE";
```

But how do you get `gas_used`? Through tests!

To calculate `gas_used`, you should write a test for your contract that:

1. Makes a transfer.
2. Checks if it's successful and retrieves the transfer info.
3. Checks the actual amount of gas used by that transfer for computation.

Contract computation flow can depend on input data. You should run contract in that way to use as much gas as possible. Make sure that you are using the most expensive compute way to compute contract

```ts
// Just Init code
const deployerJettonWallet = await userWallet(deployer.address);
let initialJettonBalance = await deployerJettonWallet.getJettonBalance();
const notDeployerJettonWallet = await userWallet(notDeployer.address);
let initialJettonBalance2 = await notDeployerJettonWallet.getJettonBalance();
let sentAmount = toNano('0.5');
let forwardAmount = toNano('0.05');
let forwardPayload = beginCell().storeUint(0x1234567890abcdefn, 128).endCell();
// Make sure payload is different, so cell load is charged for each individual payload.
let customPayload = beginCell().storeUint(0xfedcba0987654321n, 128).endCell();

// Let's use this case for fees calculation
// Put the forward payload into custom payload, to make sure maximum possible gas is used during computation
const sendResult = await deployerJettonWallet.sendTransfer(deployer.getSender(), toNano('0.17'), // tons
    sentAmount, notDeployer.address,
    deployer.address, customPayload, forwardAmount, forwardPayload);
expect(sendResult.transactions).toHaveTransaction({ //excesses
    from: notDeployerJettonWallet.address,
    to: deployer.address,
});
/*
transfer_notification#7362d09c query_id:uint64 amount:(VarUInteger 16)
                              sender:MsgAddress forward_payload:(Either Cell ^Cell)
                              = InternalMsgBody;
*/
expect(sendResult.transactions).toHaveTransaction({ // notification
    from: notDeployerJettonWallet.address,
    to: notDeployer.address,
    value: forwardAmount,
    body: beginCell().storeUint(Op.transfer_notification, 32).storeUint(0, 64) // default queryId
        .storeCoins(sentAmount)
        .storeAddress(deployer.address)
        .storeUint(1, 1)
        .storeRef(forwardPayload)
        .endCell()
});
const transferTx = findTransactionRequired(sendResult.transactions, {
    on: deployerJettonWallet.address,
    from: deployer.address,
    op: Op.transfer,
    success: true
});

let computedGeneric: (transaction: Transaction) => TransactionComputeVm;
computedGeneric = (transaction) => {
  if(transaction.description.type !== "generic")
    throw("Expected generic transactionaction");
  if(transaction.description.computePhase.type !== "vm")
    throw("Compute phase expected")
  return transaction.description.computePhase;
}

let printTxGasStats: (name: string, trans: Transaction) => bigint;
printTxGasStats = (name, transaction) => {
    const txComputed = computedGeneric(transaction);
    console.log(`${name} used ${txComputed.gasUsed} gas`);
    console.log(`${name} gas cost: ${txComputed.gasFees}`);
    return txComputed.gasFees;
}

send_gas_fee = printTxGasStats("Jetton transfer", transferTx);
```

## Forward Fee

### Overview

The forward fee is taken for outgoing messages.

Generally, there are three cases of forward fee processing:

1. The message structure is deterministic and you can predict the fee.
2. The message structure depends a lot on the incoming message structure.
3. You can't predict the outgoing message structure at all.

### Calculation Flow

If the message structure is deterministic, use the `GETFORWARDFEE` opcode with the following parameters:

| Param name | Description                                                                               |
|:-----------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| cells      | Number of cells, read more [here](/develop/howto/fees-low-level#in_fwd_fees-out_fwd_fees) |
| bits       | Number of bits, read more [here](/develop/howto/fees-low-level#in_fwd_fees-out_fwd_fees)  |
| is_mc      | True if the source or destination is in the masterchain                                   |

However, sometimes the outgoing message depends significantly on the incoming structure, and in that case, you can't fully predict the fee. Try to use the `GETORIGINALFWDFEE` opcode with the following parameters:

| Param name | Description                                         |
|:-----------|:----------------------------------------------------|
| fwd_fee    | Parsed from the incoming message                    |
| is_mc      | True if the source or destination is in the masterchain |

If even `GETORIGINALFWDFEE` can't be used, there is one more option. **It is the least optimal way but better than not checking**. Use the `SENDMSG` opcode with the following parameters:

| Param name | Description  |
|:-----------|:-------------|
| cells      | Number of cells |
| mode       | Message mode |

It creates an output action and returns a fee for creating a message. However, it uses an unpredictable amount of gas, which can't be calculated using formulas, so how can it be calculated? Use `GASCONSUMED`:

```func
int send_message(cell msg, int mode) impure asm "SENDMSG";
int gas_consumed() asm "GASCONSUMED";
;; ... some code ...

() calculate_forward_fee(cell msg, int mode) inline {
  int gas_before = gas_consumed();
  int forward_fee = send_message(msg, mode);
  int gas_usage = gas_consumed() - gas_before;
  
  ;; forward fee -- fee value
  ;; gas_usage -- amount of gas, used to send msg
}
```

## See Also
- [Stablecoin contract with fees calculation](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/stablecoin-contract)
