docs/learn/introduction.md, before:

# Introduction


:::info new to blockchain?
If you're completely new to blockchain technology and want to understand the ideas and why it's so important — it's easier to start with these materials:

* [How a Blockchain Can Help You on a Deserted Island](https://talkol.medium.com/why-decentralized-consensus-blockchain-is-good-for-business-5ff263468210)
* [How to Run a Blockchain on a Deserted Island with Pen and Paper](https://talkol.medium.com/how-to-run-a-blockchain-on-a-deserted-island-with-pen-and-paper-899949ec555b)
* [\[YouTube\] Crypto Networks and Why They Matter](https://youtu.be/2wxtiNgXBaU)
:::


## What is TON?

The _The Open Network (TON)_ is a fast, secure and scalable blockchain and
network project, focused on handling _millions of transactions per second_ if
necessary, and both user-friendly and service provider-friendly platform. 

One might think about TON as a huge distributed supercomputer,
or rather a huge "_superserver_", intended to host and provide a variety of
services.

Next concept to read: [Blockchain of Blockchains](/learn/overviews/TON_blockchain_overview).

## Ethereum to TON


Especially for Ethereum developers, our community made a small introduction article that could help you understand more about TON:

* [SIX unique aspects of TON Blockchain that will surprise Solidity developers](https://society.ton.org/six-unique-aspects-of-ton-blockchain-that-will-surprise-solidity-developers)
* [It’s time to try something new: Asynchronous smart contracts](https://telegra.ph/Its-time-to-try-something-new-Asynchronous-smart-contracts-03-25)

Commit message:

updated "introduction" page in TON

docs/learn/introduction.md, after:

# What is TON?

## Bird's eye overview

To understand clearly what the decentralized internet backed by TON is you can watch video with bird's eye overview in essential concepts:

<iframe width="672" height="391" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/XgzHmV_nnpY" title="TON - The Open Network" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## What is TON?

The _The Open Network (TON)_ is a fast, secure and scalable blockchain and
network project, focused on handling _millions of transactions per second_ if
necessary, and both user-friendly and service provider-friendly platform. 

One might think about TON as a huge distributed supercomputer,
or rather a huge "_superserver_", intended to host and provide a variety of
services.

Read more in concepts: [Blockchain of Blockchains](/learn/overviews/TON_blockchain_overview).

:::tip starter tip
It's easier to discover TON on practice with [Use-cases Overview](/participate/web3/overview#use-cases) or [TON Hello World](/develop/getting-started).
:::

## New to blockchains?

If you're completely new to blockchain technology and want to understand the ideas and why it's so important — it's easier to start with these materials:

* [How a Blockchain Can Help You on a Deserted Island](https://talkol.medium.com/why-decentralized-consensus-blockchain-is-good-for-business-5ff263468210)
* [How to Run a Blockchain on a Deserted Island with Pen and Paper](https://talkol.medium.com/how-to-run-a-blockchain-on-a-deserted-island-with-pen-and-paper-899949ec555b)
* [\[YouTube\] Crypto Networks and Why They Matter](https://youtu.be/2wxtiNgXBaU)


## Ethereum to TON

Especially for Ethereum developers, our community made a small introduction article that could help you understand more about TON:

* [SIX unique aspects of TON Blockchain that will surprise Solidity developers](https://society.ton.org/six-unique-aspects-of-ton-blockchain-that-will-surprise-solidity-developers)
* [It’s time to try something new: Asynchronous smart contracts](https://telegra.ph/Its-time-to-try-something-new-Asynchronous-smart-contracts-03-25)
