docs/learn/introduction.mdx, before:

# What is TON?

_The Open Network (TON)_ is a fast, secure, scalable blockchain and
network project, focused on handling _millions of transactions per second_ if
necessary, and providing both a user- and service provider-friendly platform.

One might think of TON as a huge distributed supercomputer,
or rather a huge "_superserver_", intended to host and provide a variety of
services.

Read more in the concepts section: [Blockchain of Blockchains](/learn/overviews/TON_blockchain_overview).

:::tip starter tip
It's easier to discover how TON works in practice with [Use-Cases Overview](/participate/web3/overview#use-cases) or [TON Hello World](/develop/getting-started).
:::

## New to blockchains?

If you're completely new to blockchain technology and want to understand the ideas and why it's so important — it's easier to start with these materials:

* [How a Blockchain Can Help You on a Deserted Island](https://talkol.medium.com/why-decentralized-consensus-blockchain-is-good-for-business-5ff263468210)
* [How to Run a Blockchain on a Deserted Island with Pen and Paper](https://talkol.medium.com/how-to-run-a-blockchain-on-a-deserted-island-with-pen-and-paper-899949ec555b)
* [\[YouTube\] Crypto Networks and Why They Matter](https://youtu.be/2wxtiNgXBaU)


## Ethereum to TON

Especially for Ethereum developers, our community has made a small introductory article that could help you understand more about TON:

* [Six unique aspects of TON Blockchain that will surprise Solidity developers](https://blog.ton.org/six-unique-aspects-of-ton-blockchain-that-will-surprise-solidity-developers)
* [It’s time to try something new: Asynchronous smart contracts](https://telegra.ph/Its-time-to-try-something-new-Asynchronous-smart-contracts-03-25)

Commit message:

url to kebab-case fixes, video player fixed, main page upgraded, "howto" category fixes

docs/learn/introduction.mdx, after:

import Player from '@site/src/components/player'

# The Open Network

__The Open Network (TON)__ is a fast, secure, and scalable blockchain focused on handling _millions of transactions per second_ with one goal: to reach the first billion blockchain users.

You can imagine TON as a huge distributed supercomputer,
or a "_superserver_", intended to host and provide a variety of services to build decentralized internet of the future.

* Discover which services TON provides: [Participate in TON](/participate/)
* Dive deep to the technical aspects: [Blockchain of Blockchains](/learn/overviews/ton-blockchain)
* Play with TON Blockchain on practice: [Getting Started](/develop/getting-started)

## Bird's eye overview

To understand clearly what the decentralized internet backed by TON is you can watch video with bird's eye overview in essential concepts:

<Player url="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XgzHmV_nnpY" />

## New to blockchains?

If you're completely new to blockchain technology and want to understand the ideas and why it's so important — it's easier to start with these materials:

* [How a Blockchain Can Help You on a Deserted Island](https://talkol.medium.com/why-decentralized-consensus-blockchain-is-good-for-business-5ff263468210)
* [How to Run a Blockchain on a Deserted Island with Pen and Paper](https://talkol.medium.com/how-to-run-a-blockchain-on-a-deserted-island-with-pen-and-paper-899949ec555b)
* [\[YouTube\] Crypto Networks and Why They Matter](https://youtu.be/2wxtiNgXBaU)


## Ethereum to TON

Especially for Ethereum developers, our community has made a small introductory article that could help you understand more about TON:

* [Six unique aspects of TON Blockchain that will surprise Solidity developers](https://blog.ton.org/six-unique-aspects-of-ton-blockchain-that-will-surprise-solidity-developers)
* [It’s time to try something new: Asynchronous smart contracts](https://telegra.ph/Its-time-to-try-something-new-Asynchronous-smart-contracts-03-25)
