docs/v3/guidelines/web3/ton-dns/dns.md, before:

# TON DNS & Domains

TON DNS is a service for translating human-readable domain names (such as `test.ton` or `mysite.temp.ton`) into TON Smart Contract Addresses, ADNL Addresses employed by services running on the TON Network (such as TON Sites) and so on.

## Standard

[TON DNS Standard](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TIPs/issues/81) describes the format of domain names, the process of resolving a domain, the interface of DNS smart contracts and the format of DNS records.

## SDK

Working with TON DNS is implemented in JavaScript SDK [TonWeb](https://github.com/toncenter/tonweb) and [TonLib](https://ton.org/#/apis/?id=_2-ton-api).

```js
const address: Address = await tonweb.dns.getWalletAddress('test.ton');

// or 

const address: Address = await tonweb.dns.resolve('test.ton', TonWeb.dns.DNS_CATEGORY_WALLET);
```

Also `lite-client` and `tonlib-cli` is supported by DNS queries.

## First-level domain

Currently, only domains ending in `.ton` are recognized as valid TON DNS domains.

Root DNS smart contract source code - https://github.com/ton-blockchain/dns-contract/blob/main/func/root-dns.fc.

This could change in the future. Adding a new first-level domain will require new root smart contract and general vote to change the [network config #4](https://ton.org/#/smart-contracts/governance?id=config).

## *.ton domains

*.ton domains are implemented in the form of an NFT. Since they implement the NFT standard, they are compatible with regular NFT services (e.g. NFT marketplaces) and wallets that can display NFT.

*.ton domains source code - https://github.com/ton-blockchain/dns-contract.

.ton domains resolver implements an NFT collection interface and .ton domain implements an NFT item interface.

The primary sale of *.ton domains happens via a decentralized open auction at https://dns.ton.org. Source code - https://github.com/ton-blockchain/dns.

## Subdomains

The domain owner can make subdomains by setting the address of the smart contract responsible for resolving subdomains in the DNS record `sha256("dns_next_resolver")`.

It can be any smart contract that implements the DNS standard.

Commit message:

1102-rework-proofread-web3-guidelines (#1103)
* check

* updated overview

* updated dns

* updated connect with ton proxy

* how to open any ton site

* updated how to run ton sites

* updated ton sites for apps

* updated site and domain management

* minor

* updated storage faq

* check

* updated subresolvers

* minor

* till running an entry proxy

* updated running your ton proxy

* updated storage-provider

* updated storage daemon

docs/v3/guidelines/web3/ton-dns/dns.md, after:

# TON DNS & domains

TON DNS is a service that translates human-readable domain names like `test.ton` or `mysite.temp.ton` into TON smart contract addresses, ADNL addresses used by services on the TON Network such as TON Sites, and more. 

## Standard

The [TON DNS standard](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TIPs/issues/81) outlines the domain name format, the domain resolution process, the interface for DNS smart contracts, and the structure of DNS records.

## SDK

Support for working with TON DNS is available through the JavaScript SDK [TonWeb](https://github.com/toncenter/tonweb) and [TonLib](https://ton.org/#/apis/?id=_2-ton-api).

```js
const address: Address = await tonweb.dns.getWalletAddress('test.ton');

// or 

const address: Address = await tonweb.dns.resolve('test.ton', TonWeb.dns.DNS_CATEGORY_WALLET);
```

Also, `lite-client` and `tonlib-cli` are supported by DNS queries.

## First-level domain

Only domains ending in `.ton` are currently recognized as valid TON DNS domains.

You can view the root DNS smart contract source code [here](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/dns-contract/blob/main/func/root-dns.fc).

This may change in the future. Adding a new top-level domain would require deploying a new root DNS smart contract and a community vote to update the [network config #4](https://ton.org/#/smart-contracts/governance?id=config).


## *.ton domains

`.ton` domains are implemented as NFTs. Because they follow the standard NFT format, they're compatible with most NFT marketplaces and wallets that support NFTs.

The source code for `.ton` domains is available [here](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/dns-contract).

The `.ton` domain resolver acts as an NFT collection, while each individual `.ton` domain functions as an NFT item.

Primary sales of `.ton` domains occur through a decentralized open auction at [dns.ton.org](https://dns.ton.org). The auction's source code can be found [here](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/dns).



## Subdomains
Domain owners can create subdomains by setting the smart contract address responsible for subdomain resolution in the DNS record using the key `sha256("dns_next_resolver")`.

This address can point to any smart contract implementing the TON DNS standard.
