docs/v3/guidelines/ton-connect/guidelines/creating-manifest.md, before:


# Creating manifest.json

Every app needs a manifest to pass meta information to the wallet. The manifest is a JSON file named as `tonconnect-manifest.json` following format:

```json
{
    "url": "<app-url>",                        // required
    "name": "<app-name>",                      // required
    "iconUrl": "<app-icon-url>",               // required
    "termsOfUseUrl": "<terms-of-use-url>",     // optional
    "privacyPolicyUrl": "<privacy-policy-url>" // optional
}
```

## Example

You can find an example of the manifest below:

```json
{
    "url": "https://ton.vote",
    "name": "TON Vote",
    "iconUrl": "https://ton.vote/logo.png"
}
```
## Best practices

- The best practice is to place the manifest in the root of your app and repository, e.g. `https://myapp.com/tonconnect-manifest.json`. It allows the wallet to handle your app better and improve the UX connected to your app.
- Ensure that the `manifest.json` file is accessible via a GET request at its URL

## Fields description
|Field|Requirement|Description|
|---|---|---|
|`url` |required| app URL. Will be used as the DAppidentifier. Will be used to open the DAppafter click to its icon in the wallet. It is recommended to pass url without closing slash, e.g. 'https://mydapp.com' instead of 'https://mydapp.com/'.|
| `name`|required| app name. Might be simple, will not be used as identifier.|
| `iconUrl`| required | Url to the app icon. Must be PNG, ICO, ... format. SVG icons are not supported. Perfectly pass url to a 180x180px PNG icon.|
| `termsOfUseUrl` |optional| url to the Terms Of Use document. Optional for usual apps, but required for the apps which is placed in the Tonkeeper recommended apps list.|
| `privacyPolicyUrl` | optional | url to the Privacy Policy document. Optional for usual apps, but required for the apps which is placed in the Tonkeeper recommended apps list.|

Commit message:

Rework and proofread Integrate with TON part 2 of 2 (#1090)
* refactor_headers

* rework_manifest

* rework_ton_connect_section

* Update ton-connect-for-business.md

Minor proofread

* Update ton-connect-for-security.md

Minor proofread

* Update creating-manifest.md

Minor proofreading and updates

* Update integration-with-javascript-sdk.md

Deprecation of the page

* Update preparing-messages.mdx

Minor proofreading and rework

* Update preparing-messages.mdx

* Update sending-messages.md

Minor proofreading and rework.

* Update verifying-signed-in-users.mdx

Minor proofreading and rework

* deprecate_old_page

* add_redirect

docs/v3/guidelines/ton-connect/guidelines/creating-manifest.md, after:


# Creating the TON Connect manifest for DApp

## Manifest definition 

Every app needs a manifest to pass meta information to the wallet. 

The manifest is a JSON file named `tonconnect-manifest.json` and has the following format:

```json
{
    "url": "<app-url>",                        // required
    "name": "<app-name>",                      // required
    "iconUrl": "<app-icon-url>",               // required
    "termsOfUseUrl": "<terms-of-use-url>",     // optional
    "privacyPolicyUrl": "<privacy-policy-url>" // optional
}
```

|Field|Requirement| Description                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|---|---|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|`url` |required| `url` defines the app URL.  It will be used to open the DApp after clicking its icon in the wallet. It is recommended to pass the URL without closing the slash, e.g., 'https://mydapp.com' instead of 'https://mydapp.com/'. |
| `name`|required| `name` defines the app name. Typically simple word. Shouldn't be used as identifier.                                                                                                                             |
| `iconUrl`| required | `iconUrl` defines the URL to the app icon. It must be in `PNG` or `ICO` format. `SVG` icons are not supported. Perfectly pass the URL to a 180x180px PNG icon.                                                                   |
| `termsOfUseUrl` |optional| Optional for usual apps, but required for the apps placed in the Tonkeeper recommended apps list.                                                                                                       |
| `privacyPolicyUrl` | optional | Optional for usual apps, but required for the apps placed in the Tonkeeper recommended apps list.                                                                                                       |

:::info
The original definition is [here](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton-connect/blob/main/requests-responses.md#app-manifest).
:::

### Example

```json
{
    "url": "https://ton.vote",
    "name": "TON Vote",
    "iconUrl": "https://ton.vote/logo.png"
}
```
## Best practices

- Place the manifest in the root of your app and repository, for example: `https://myapp.com/tonconnect-manifest.json`. It allows the wallet to handle your app better and improve the UX connected to your app.
- The fields `url`, `iconUrl`, `termsOfUseUrl`, `privacyPolicyUrl`: must be publicly accessible from the internet and should be requestable from any origin without CORS restrictions.
- The manifest must be publicly accessible from the internet and should be requestable from any origin without CORS restrictions.
- Ensure that the `manifest.json` file is accessible via a GET request at its URL

## See also
- [TON Connect GitHub - App manifest](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton-connect/blob/main/requests-responses.md#app-manifest)
