docs/develop/dapps/ton-connect/README.mdx, before:

import Button from '@site/src/components/button'

# Overview

TON Connect is a communication protocol between **wallets** and **apps** in the TON ecosystem.

**Apps** in TON provide rich functionality and high performance, while protecting users’ funds via smart contracts. Therefore they are often called decentralized apps or “dapps”.

**Wallets** provide the UI to approving transactions and hold users’ cryptographic keys securely on their personal devices.
This separation of concerns enables rapid innovation and high level of security for the users: wallets do not need to build walled-garden ecosystems themselves, while the apps do not need to take the risk holding end users’ accounts.

TON Connect aims of offering a seamless user experience between wallets and apps.

<Button href="https://www.npmjs.com/package/@tonconnect/sdk"
colorType="primary" sizeType={'sm'}>
Getting Started
</Button>
<Button href="/develop/dapps/ton-connect/integration" colorType={'secondary'} sizeType={'sm'}>Integration manual</Button>


## Why TON Connect? Is it safe?

- [TON Connect for Business](/develop/dapps/ton-connect/business)
- [TON Connect for Developers](/develop/dapps/ton-connect/developers)
- [TON Connect for Security](/develop/dapps/ton-connect/security)
- [TON Connect 2.0 vs 1.0](/develop/dapps/ton-connect/comparison)

## TON Connect Manuals

Go on to [integration manual](/develop/dapps/ton-connect/integration) to find main steps to implement TON Connect in your application.

Commit message:

ton_connect_2_list
Added ton-connect 2.0 compatible list of services.

docs/develop/dapps/ton-connect/README.mdx, after:

import Button from '@site/src/components/button'

# Overview

TON Connect is a communication protocol between **wallets** and **apps** in the TON ecosystem.

**Apps** in TON provide rich functionality and high performance, while protecting users’ funds via smart contracts. Therefore they are often called decentralized apps or “dapps”.

**Wallets** provide the UI to approving transactions and hold users’ cryptographic keys securely on their personal devices.
This separation of concerns enables rapid innovation and high level of security for the users: wallets do not need to build walled-garden ecosystems themselves, while the apps do not need to take the risk holding end users’ accounts.

TON Connect aims of offering a seamless user experience between wallets and apps.

<Button href="https://www.npmjs.com/package/@tonconnect/sdk"
colorType="primary" sizeType={'sm'}>
Getting Started
</Button>
<Button href="/develop/dapps/ton-connect/integration" colorType={'secondary'} sizeType={'sm'}>Integration manual</Button>

## Third-Party TON Services Compatible with TON Connect 2.0
getgems, stonfi и tonstarter
- [Getgems — The Open Network Marketplace](https://getgems.io/)
- [STON.fi — AMM DEX for the TON blockchain](https://ston.fi/)
- [Tonstarter](http://tonstarter.com/)

To view the entire list, please click [here](https://github.com/ton-community/awesome-ton).

## Why TON Connect? Is it safe?

- [TON Connect for Business](/develop/dapps/ton-connect/business)
- [TON Connect for Developers](/develop/dapps/ton-connect/developers)
- [TON Connect for Security](/develop/dapps/ton-connect/security)
- [TON Connect 2.0 vs 1.0](/develop/dapps/ton-connect/comparison)

## TON Connect Manuals

Go on to [integration manual](/develop/dapps/ton-connect/integration) to find main steps to implement TON Connect in your application.
