docs/develop/dapps/ton-connect/sign.mdx, before:

import ThemedImage from '@theme/ThemedImage';

# Verifying signed in users on backend

This page describes a way for backend to ensure that the user truly owns the declared address.
Please note that the user verification is not required for all DApps.

It is useful if you want to verify a user to provide them with their personal information from the back end.

## How does it work?

- User initiates sign in process.
- Backend generates a ton_proof entity and sends it to frontend.
- Frontend signs in to wallet using ton_proof and receives back a signed ton_proof.
- Frontend sends signed ton_proof to backend for verification.

<br></br>
<ThemedImage
    alt=""
    sources={{
        light: '/img/docs/ton-connect/ton_proof_scheme.svg?raw=true',
        dark: '/img/docs/ton-connect/ton_proof_scheme-dark.svg?raw=true',
    }}
/>
<br></br>

## Structure of ton_proof

We will be using the TonProof entity, implemented inside connector.

```js
type TonProofItemReply = TonProofItemReplySuccess | TonProofItemReplyError;

type TonProofItemReplySuccess = {
  name: "ton_proof";
  proof: {
    timestamp: string; // 64-bit unix epoch time of the signing operation (seconds)
    domain: {
      lengthBytes: number; // AppDomain Length
      value: string;  // app domain name (as url part, without encoding)
    };
    signature: string; // base64-encoded signature
    payload: string; // payload from the request
  }
}

```

## Checking ton_proof on Server Side

1. Retrieve `TonProofItemReply` from a user.
2. Verify that the received domain corresponds to the domain of your application.
3. Check if `TonProofItemReply.payload` is permitted by original server and is still active.
4. Check if `timestamp` is actual at the moment.
5. Assemble a message according to the [message scheme](/develop/dapps/ton-connect/sign#concept-explanation).
6. Retrieve `public_key` either from API (a) or via back-end logic (b)
- 6a:
    - Retrieve `{public_key, address}` from the `walletStateInit` with [TON API](https://docs.tonconsole.com/tonapi/api-v2#:~:text=/v2/-,tonconnect,-/stateinit) method `POST /v2/tonconnect/stateinit`.
    - Check that the `address` extracted from `walletStateInit` corresponds to wallet `address` declared by user.
- 6b:
    - Obtain the wallet `public_key` via the wallet contract [get method](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/wallet-contract/blob/main/func/wallet-v4-code.fc#L174).
    - If the contract is not active, or if it lacks the get_method found in older wallet versions (v1-v3), then obtaining the key in this manner will be impossible. Instead, you will need to parse the walletStateInit provided by the frontend. Ensure that TonAddressItemReply.walletStateInit.hash() is equal to TonAddressItemReply.address.hash(), indicating a BoC hash.
7. Verify that the `signature` from the frontend actually signs the assembled message and corresponds to the `public_key` of the address.

## React Example

1. Add token provider to the root of your app:

```tsx
function App() {
    const [token, setToken] = useState<string | null>(null);

  return (
      <BackendTokenContext.Provider value={{token, setToken}}>
            { /* Your app */ }
      </BackendTokenContext.Provider>
  )
}
```

2. Implement authentication on backend:

<details>
<summary>Example</summary>

```tsx
import {useContext, useEffect, useRef} from "react";
import {BackendTokenContext} from "./BackendTokenContext";
import {useIsConnectionRestored, useTonConnectUI, useTonWallet} from "@tonconnect/ui-react";
import {backendAuth} from "./backend-auth";

const localStorageKey = 'my-dapp-auth-token';
const payloadTTLMS = 1000 * 60 * 20;

export function useBackendAuth() {
    const { setToken } = useContext(BackendTokenContext);
    const isConnectionRestored = useIsConnectionRestored();
    const wallet = useTonWallet();
    const [tonConnectUI] = useTonConnectUI();
    const interval = useRef<ReturnType<typeof setInterval> | undefined>();

    useEffect(() => {
        if (!isConnectionRestored || !setToken) {
            return;
        }

        clearInterval(interval.current);

        if (!wallet) {
            localStorage.removeItem(localStorageKey);
            setToken(null);

            const refreshPayload = async () => {
                tonConnectUI.setConnectRequestParameters({ state: 'loading' });

                const value = await backendAuth.generatePayload();
                if (!value) {
                    tonConnectUI.setConnectRequestParameters(null);
                } else {
                    tonConnectUI.setConnectRequestParameters({state: 'ready', value});
                }
            }

            refreshPayload();
            setInterval(refreshPayload, payloadTTLMS);
            return;
        }

        const token = localStorage.getItem(localStorageKey);
        if (token) {
            setToken(token);
            return;
        }

        if (wallet.connectItems?.tonProof && !('error' in wallet.connectItems.tonProof)) {
            backendAuth.checkProof(wallet.connectItems.tonProof.proof, wallet.account).then(result => {
                if (result) {
                    setToken(result);
                    localStorage.setItem(localStorageKey, result);
                } else {
                    alert('Please try another wallet');
                    tonConnectUI.disconnect();
                }
            })
        } else {
            alert('Please try another wallet');
            tonConnectUI.disconnect();
        }

    }, [wallet, isConnectionRestored, setToken])
}
```
</details>

## Concept Explanation

If `TonProofItem` is requested, wallet proves ownership of the selected account’s key. The signed message is bound to:

- Unique prefix to separate messages from on-chain messages. (`ton-connect`)
- Wallet address
- App domain
- Signing timestamp
- App’s custom payload (where server may put its nonce, cookie id, expiration time)

```
message = utf8_encode("ton-proof-item-v2/") ++
          Address ++
          AppDomain ++
          Timestamp ++
          Payload

signature = Ed25519Sign(privkey, sha256(0xffff ++ utf8_encode("ton-connect") ++ sha256(message)))
```

where:

* `Address` is the wallet address encoded as a sequence:
 * `workchain`: 32-bit signed integer big endian;
 * `hash`: 256-bit unsigned integer big endian;
* `AppDomain` is Length ++ EncodedDomainName
- `Length` is 32-bit value of utf-8 encoded app domain name length in bytes
- `EncodedDomainName` id `Length`-byte  utf-8 encoded app domain name
* `Timestamp` 64-bit unix epoch time of the signing operation
* `Payload` is a variable-length binary string.

Note: payload is variable-length untrusted data. We put it last to avoid using unnecessary length prefixes.

The signature must be verified by public key:

1. First, try to obtain public key via `get_public_key` get-method on smart contract deployed at `Address`.

2. If the smart contract is not deployed yet, or the get-method is missing, then:

    1.  Parse `TonAddressItemReply.walletStateInit` and get public key from stateInit. You can compare the `walletStateInit.code` with the code of standard wallets contracts and parse the data according to the found wallet version.

    2.  Check that `TonAddressItemReply.publicKey` equals to obtained public key

    3.  Check that `TonAddressItemReply.walletStateInit.hash()` equals to `TonAddressItemReply.address`. `.hash()` means BoC hash.


### Examples of TON Proof Verification

* [Go demo app](https://github.com/ton-connect/demo-dapp-backend)
* [Rust demo app](https://github.com/liketurbo/demo-dapp-backend-rs)
* [JS demo app](https://github.com/liketurbo/demo-dapp-backend-js)
* [Python example](https://github.com/XaBbl4/pytonconnect/blob/main/examples/check_proof.py)
* [PHP example](https://github.com/vladimirfokingithub/Ton-Connect-Proof-Php-Check)

## See Also

* [[YouTube] Check ton_proof for @tonconnect/react-ui [RU]](https://youtu.be/wIMbkJHv0Fs?list=PLyDBPwv9EPsCJ226xS5_dKmXXxWx1CKz_&t=2971)
* [Preparing Messages](/develop/dapps/ton-connect/message-builders)
* [Sending Messages](/develop/dapps/ton-connect/transactions)

Commit message:

add backend example for ton proof

docs/develop/dapps/ton-connect/sign.mdx, after:

import ThemedImage from '@theme/ThemedImage';

# Verifying signed in users on backend

This page describes a way for backend to ensure that the user truly owns the declared address.
Please note that the user verification is not required for all DApps.

It is useful if you want to verify a user to provide them with their personal information from the back end.

## How does it work?

- User initiates sign in process.
- Backend generates a ton_proof entity and sends it to frontend.
- Frontend signs in to wallet using ton_proof and receives back a signed ton_proof.
- Frontend sends signed ton_proof to backend for verification.

<br></br>
<ThemedImage
    alt=""
    sources={{
        light: '/img/docs/ton-connect/ton_proof_scheme.svg?raw=true',
        dark: '/img/docs/ton-connect/ton_proof_scheme-dark.svg?raw=true',
    }}
/>
<br></br>

## Structure of ton_proof

We will be using the TonProof entity, implemented inside connector.

```js
type TonProofItemReply = TonProofItemReplySuccess | TonProofItemReplyError;

type TonProofItemReplySuccess = {
  name: "ton_proof";
  proof: {
    timestamp: string; // 64-bit unix epoch time of the signing operation (seconds)
    domain: {
      lengthBytes: number; // AppDomain Length
      value: string;  // app domain name (as url part, without encoding)
    };
    signature: string; // base64-encoded signature
    payload: string; // payload from the request
  }
}

```

## Checking ton_proof on Server Side

1. Retrieve `TonProofItemReply` from a user.
2. Verify that the received domain corresponds to the domain of your application.
3. Check if `TonProofItemReply.payload` is permitted by original server and is still active.
4. Check if `timestamp` is actual at the moment.
5. Assemble a message according to the [message scheme](/develop/dapps/ton-connect/sign#concept-explanation).
6. Retrieve `public_key` either from API (a) or via back-end logic (b)
- 6a:
    - Retrieve `{public_key, address}` from the `walletStateInit` with [TON API](https://docs.tonconsole.com/tonapi/api-v2#:~:text=/v2/-,tonconnect,-/stateinit) method `POST /v2/tonconnect/stateinit`.
    - Check that the `address` extracted from `walletStateInit` corresponds to wallet `address` declared by user.
- 6b:
    - Obtain the wallet `public_key` via the wallet contract [get method](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/wallet-contract/blob/main/func/wallet-v4-code.fc#L174).
    - If the contract is not active, or if it lacks the get_method found in older wallet versions (v1-v3), then obtaining the key in this manner will be impossible. Instead, you will need to parse the walletStateInit provided by the frontend. Ensure that TonAddressItemReply.walletStateInit.hash() is equal to TonAddressItemReply.address.hash(), indicating a BoC hash.
7. Verify that the `signature` from the frontend actually signs the assembled message and corresponds to the `public_key` of the address.

## React Example

1. Add token provider to the root of your app:

```tsx
function App() {
    const [token, setToken] = useState<string | null>(null);

  return (
      <BackendTokenContext.Provider value={{token, setToken}}>
            { /* Your app */ }
      </BackendTokenContext.Provider>
  )
}
```

2. Implement authentication on the frontend with backend integration:

<details>
<summary>Example</summary>

```tsx
import {useContext, useEffect, useRef} from "react";
import {BackendTokenContext} from "./BackendTokenContext";
import {useIsConnectionRestored, useTonConnectUI, useTonWallet} from "@tonconnect/ui-react";
import {backendAuth} from "./backend-auth";

const localStorageKey = 'my-dapp-auth-token';
const payloadTTLMS = 1000 * 60 * 20;

export function useBackendAuth() {
    const { setToken } = useContext(BackendTokenContext);
    const isConnectionRestored = useIsConnectionRestored();
    const wallet = useTonWallet();
    const [tonConnectUI] = useTonConnectUI();
    const interval = useRef<ReturnType<typeof setInterval> | undefined>();

    useEffect(() => {
        if (!isConnectionRestored || !setToken) {
            return;
        }

        clearInterval(interval.current);

        if (!wallet) {
            localStorage.removeItem(localStorageKey);
            setToken(null);

            const refreshPayload = async () => {
                tonConnectUI.setConnectRequestParameters({ state: 'loading' });

                const value = await backendAuth.generatePayload();
                if (!value) {
                    tonConnectUI.setConnectRequestParameters(null);
                } else {
                    tonConnectUI.setConnectRequestParameters({state: 'ready', value});
                }
            }

            refreshPayload();
            setInterval(refreshPayload, payloadTTLMS);
            return;
        }

        const token = localStorage.getItem(localStorageKey);
        if (token) {
            setToken(token);
            return;
        }

        if (wallet.connectItems?.tonProof && !('error' in wallet.connectItems.tonProof)) {
            backendAuth.checkProof(wallet.connectItems.tonProof.proof, wallet.account).then(result => {
                if (result) {
                    setToken(result);
                    localStorage.setItem(localStorageKey, result);
                } else {
                    alert('Please try another wallet');
                    tonConnectUI.disconnect();
                }
            })
        } else {
            alert('Please try another wallet');
            tonConnectUI.disconnect();
        }

    }, [wallet, isConnectionRestored, setToken])
}
```
</details>

## Backend Example

You can review our [example](https://github.com/ton-connect/demo-dapp-with-react-ui/tree/master/src/server) showcasing the key methods:
- [generatePayload](https://github.com/ton-connect/demo-dapp-with-react-ui/blob/master/src/server/api/generate-payload.ts): Generates a payload for ton proof
- [checkProof](https://github.com/ton-connect/demo-dapp-with-react-ui/blob/master/src/server/api/check-proof.ts): Checks the proof and returns an access token.

## Concept Explanation

If `TonProofItem` is requested, wallet proves ownership of the selected account’s key. The signed message is bound to:

- Unique prefix to separate messages from on-chain messages. (`ton-connect`)
- Wallet address
- App domain
- Signing timestamp
- App’s custom payload (where server may put its nonce, cookie id, expiration time)

```
message = utf8_encode("ton-proof-item-v2/") ++
          Address ++
          AppDomain ++
          Timestamp ++
          Payload

signature = Ed25519Sign(privkey, sha256(0xffff ++ utf8_encode("ton-connect") ++ sha256(message)))
```

where:

* `Address` is the wallet address encoded as a sequence:
 * `workchain`: 32-bit signed integer big endian;
 * `hash`: 256-bit unsigned integer big endian;
* `AppDomain` is Length ++ EncodedDomainName
- `Length` is 32-bit value of utf-8 encoded app domain name length in bytes
- `EncodedDomainName` id `Length`-byte  utf-8 encoded app domain name
* `Timestamp` 64-bit unix epoch time of the signing operation
* `Payload` is a variable-length binary string.

Note: payload is variable-length untrusted data. We put it last to avoid using unnecessary length prefixes.

The signature must be verified by public key:

1. First, try to obtain public key via `get_public_key` get-method on smart contract deployed at `Address`.

2. If the smart contract is not deployed yet, or the get-method is missing, then:

    1.  Parse `TonAddressItemReply.walletStateInit` and get public key from stateInit. You can compare the `walletStateInit.code` with the code of standard wallets contracts and parse the data according to the found wallet version.

    2.  Check that `TonAddressItemReply.publicKey` equals to obtained public key

    3.  Check that `TonAddressItemReply.walletStateInit.hash()` equals to `TonAddressItemReply.address`. `.hash()` means BoC hash.


### Examples of TON Proof Verification

* [Go demo app](https://github.com/ton-connect/demo-dapp-backend)
* [Rust demo app](https://github.com/liketurbo/demo-dapp-backend-rs)
* [JS demo app](https://github.com/liketurbo/demo-dapp-backend-js)
* [Python example](https://github.com/XaBbl4/pytonconnect/blob/main/examples/check_proof.py)
* [PHP example](https://github.com/vladimirfokingithub/Ton-Connect-Proof-Php-Check)

## See Also

* [[YouTube] Check ton_proof for @tonconnect/react-ui [RU]](https://youtu.be/wIMbkJHv0Fs?list=PLyDBPwv9EPsCJ226xS5_dKmXXxWx1CKz_&t=2971)
* [Preparing Messages](/develop/dapps/ton-connect/message-builders)
* [Sending Messages](/develop/dapps/ton-connect/transactions)
